LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=56f65b60178d35fd5ffca91fcad0debecomments 
  Sign In to E-Mail 
  Print 
              Reprints 
    
 
 
 
      KENNEDY SPACE CENTER, Fla. — Normally, when NASA launches a space shuttle, there are either six or seven astronauts aboard. So why, on the 135th and final launching of the 30-year-old space shuttle program, will there be only four?        
 
    Enlarge This Image
    
 Richard Carson/Reuters
 Space Shuttle Atlantis astronauts, from left, Doug Hurley, Rex Walheim, Sandy Magnus and Chris Ferguson after a crew news conference at the Johnson Space Center in Houston last month.                            
 
  

  Multimedia
 
      Interactive Graphic  
  30 Years of the Space Shuttle
  
 
 
  
    The answer, perhaps not surprisingly, has to do with the Atlantis being the last flight: With no spare shuttle available to go and rescue the astronauts in case something goes wrong, the Americans would have to turn to the Russians to retrieve their crew from the International Space Station. And the Russian spacecraft — known as Soyuz capsules — hold only three astronauts, so two people would have to fly up and bring home the Americans one at a time.        
 “This is a very low likelihood case,” said Atlantis’ commander, Capt. Christopher J. Ferguson of the Navy, during a news conference last week. But the agency’s safety experts have “done an extraordinarily thorough job of making sure we have a good plan to get home,” he said.        
 The Atlantis is scheduled to leave from here at 11:26 a.m. on Friday, making its 33rd flight. But the forecast on Wednesday was for only a 30 percent chance of acceptable weather, so the launching could be delayed until Sunday or beyond.        
 Otherwise, the countdown was proceeding smoothly. “There are no problems yet,” said Michael P. Moses, the launching integration manager, at a news conference on Wednesday. “There are just weather forecasts.”        
 And about a million spectators are expected to show up.        
 NASA’s other two orbiters, the Discovery and the Endeavour, have completed their flying careers and are being primped for display in museums. The Atlantis was supposed to be retired now, too. NASA had prepared it as a rescue vehicle for the last flight of the Endeavour, in May, and it would have gotten off the ground only if the Endeavour had encountered trouble while in orbit.        
 But after spending hundreds of millions of dollars getting the Atlantis ready to fly, NASA officials said it made sense to fly it regardless, to carry additional supplies to the space station. And this decision required alternate contingency plans.        
 After the explosion of the Columbia eight years ago, which killed the seven astronauts on board, the space agency carefully drew up plans of what to do if an orbiter reached space safely but was damaged and could not return. Columbia was injured during liftoff when a piece of debris struck one of its wings, creating a hole that caused the shuttle to break up on its way back to earth. Investigators subsequently concluded that the problem could have been detected and the catastrophe potentially avoided.        
 For each post-Columbia shuttle trip to the International Space Station, astronauts have inspected the orbiter’s underside for damage to the heat shield similar to the puncture in Columbia’s left wing caused by falling foam. The plan was that if any such damage were found, the astronauts would remain at the space station until the next shuttles arrived and carried them home.        
 This time, if there is such a problem, it would be the smaller, three-seat Soyuz capsules that brought the astronauts home. Over the following year, the Soyuzes would launch with a crew of two instead of three, and a shuttle astronaut would take the empty seat on the return trip.        
 An extended stay of seven stranded shuttle astronauts, in addition to the station’s six crew members, would exhaust the station’s food and supplies. With four unexpected guests, the strain on the station would be manageable.        
 “We’ll be able to, I think, sort of assimilate into space station life fairly straightforwardly, if it would happen,” said Sandra H. Magnus, a member of the Atlantis crew.        
 All four astronauts — Captain Ferguson; Col. Douglas G. Hurley of the Marines; Dr. Magnus; and Col. Rex J. Walheim of the Air Force — are experienced space fliers, and all four will be busy during the 12-day mission, moving 8,000 pounds of supplies and spare parts.        
 “Having four folks who have done this at least once in the past will add dramatically to our efficiency on orbit,” Captain Ferguson said.        
 And there may be some advantages to the smaller crew. “There are less opinions to contend with,” Captain Ferguson said, drawing some laughs.        
 But the last day before landing is expected to be particularly hectic, with the four performing tasks that are usually divided among six or seven. “We’re hoping that we can create our own white space by doing them quickly enough that we can catch a break or two during the day,” Captain Ferguson said.        
 The Atlantis is scheduled to return to Kennedy Space Center just before 7 a.m. on July 20, although NASA could extend the mission by a day.        
 After the retirement of the shuttles, NASA will be counting on two commercial companies, the Space Exploration Technologies Corporation, of Hawthorne, Calif., and Orbital Sciences, of Dulles, Va., to carry supplies to the space station. The additional flight of Atlantis provides a cushion in case of further delays by the companies, keeping the station adequately supplied through next year.        
 Space Exploration Technologies, or SpaceX for short, successfully launched its Falcon 9 rocket twice last year, but will get at most one off the ground this year. The next flight, a demonstration to show that it can navigate its space capsule to the station, has been delayed from spring to late fall.        
 Meanwhile, Orbital suffered a setback last month when an engine for its rocket caught fire during testing. Orbital still hopes to launch a demonstration flight by the end of the year and begin taking supplies to the station next year.
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=67b4856a594fff8ab52b35d5ee3f47c2By April 1981 it seemed that the space shuttle Columbia had been part of the Florida landscape forever. Gleaming white in the sun by day and the floodlights that bathed it all night, the cluster of rockets, space plane and giant egglike fuel tank looked like a craggy Matterhorn transposed to the humid coast.        
 
   

  Multimedia
 
      Interactive Graphic  
  30 Years of the Space Shuttle
  
 
 
      
  
 This week: A big dig for big fossils, reflections on the space shuttle and the stroke belt in the south.
 
 
 
  Related
  Times Topic: Space Shuttle

  
   Enlarge This Image
    
 Gregg Newton/Reuters
 OCEAN VIEW Body boarding at Merritt Island, Fla., Donnie McBurney, left, and Chris Welch took in the launching of the Discovery on Oct. 29, 1998.                            
 
 
   It was surely too big to ever move, and yet the fate of the nation seemed to depend on its doing so. Months earlier I had traveled with a group of science writers on a weeklong junket through the nation’s space centers. In California, we walked underneath the next shuttle, Challenger, where Rockwell workers were gluing the fragile heat-resistant tiles to its body. At Cape Canaveral, our private jet touched down on the shuttle landing strip and we were taken within hailing distance of the waiting shuttle, close enough to see soldiers patrolling the launching pad with machine guns.        
 The shuttle was a big deal then. But now, after 30 years of shuttle flights, the last mission ever is being prepped for its launching on Friday. Humans are no closer to the stars than before, and the space program is in tatters.        
 Until that trip past the pad in 1981, the space program was something I had watched on a grainy little black-and-white TV at my apartment in Cambridge, Mass. Raised on science fiction, I knew the script: First we take the Moon, then Mars. That in fact was the vision pushed in 1969 by NASA’s administrator, Thomas O. Paine, and Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, but President Richard M. Nixon didn’t bite and history didn’t go according to plan.        
 By 1981, a decade after the glories of the Apollo Moon landings, it had been six years since Americans had last ventured into space, and editorialists were lamenting the “retreat from space.” The reusable space shuttle was supposed to make spaceflight cheap and almost as routine as air travel, and satellite launchings as uneventful as delivering the mail. There was money to be made in space and a slate of “black missions” to keep the nation secure.        
 But the shuttle was late and over budget. Those thermal tiles, vital to protecting it from the searing heat of re-entry, had an embarrassing habit of flaking off. Some people called it the Flying Brickyard.        
 Worse, overruns and delays had drastically depleted the agency’s resources for science. NASA couldn’t even afford to send a mission to Halley’s Comet.        
 Most of the scientists I know would be thrilled to see humans exploring space, landing on Mars, for example — they just don’t think that science should pick up the check. Many of them were suspicious of the shuttle, both because of the cost drain and because making instruments like the space telescope compatible with it would compromise the potential science, restricting them to low earth orbit, for example, and making them hostage to the exigencies of human spaceflight.        
 But politically, if not technically, the shuttle and the space telescope needed each other.        
 The mountain did move on April 12, 1981. We got up at midnight to drive on back roads through Cape Canaveral Air Station and then eat peanut butter crackers in our cars waiting for the dawn and the new space age. When the shuttle’s solid-fuel booster rockets went off, it was like a second sunrise blasting our greasy faces. The Alps vanished atop a biblical tower of smoke and flame.        
 Two days later, when John W. Young and Robert L. Crippen glided back down in the Mojave Desert, the double crack of Columbia’s sonic boom sounded like a message from the gods. Elated to be arriving in dignity like test pilots rather than cargo plopping into the ocean, the astronauts proceeded to strut around the shuttle inspecting it for nicks and dings.        
 And so, soon we were in the era of the space truck to nowhere, easy travel to orbit and the sight of astronauts frolicking like weightless baby sea lions in the capacious shuttle decks and laboratories. Women, scientists, a congressman and a senator, not to mention an array of guest astronauts from other countries, logged time in orbit, performing scientific experiments, often on one another. Captain Young, who had been to the Moon twice, redefined the notion of the “right stuff” when he was pictured in his command chair in his reading glasses looking over flight plans. Judith A. Resnik redefined it further when her long curly locks floated on orbit like a dark corona about her head.        
 1 
 2 
Next Page »
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=11d1dafff38f8a3df7a36b37794bf6caAs NASA prepares to launch its last space shuttle — ending 30 years in which large teams of creative scientists and engineers sent winged spaceships into orbit — it is facing what may be a bigger challenge: a brain drain that threatens to undermine safety as well as the agency’s plans.        
 
  
  Related
  Times Topic: National Aeronautics and Space Administration

  
   Enlarge This Image
    
 Bob Pearson/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
 The Discovery lifting off in 1990. The shuttle program has been the main focus of the nation's spaceflight ambitions for decades.                            
 
 
   Space experts say the best and brightest often head for the doors when rocket lines get marked for extinction, dampening morale and creating hidden threats. They call it the “Team B” effect.        
 “The good guys see the end coming and leave,” said Albert D. Wheelon, a former aerospace executive and Central Intelligence Agency official. “You’re left with the B students.”        
 NASA acknowledges the effect and its attendant dangers. It has taken hundreds of steps, including retention bonuses for skilled employees, new perks like travel benefits and more safety drills. Through cuts and attrition in recent years, the shuttle work force has declined to 7,000 workers from about 17,000.        
 “The downsizing has been well managed and has achieved an acceptable level of risk,” said Joseph W. Dyer, a retired Navy vice admiral and the chairman of NASA’s Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel. After a slow start, “NASA and its industry partners did a genuinely excellent job” in planning for the shuttle’s retirement, he said. But he conceded, “There’s added risk anytime you downsize.”        
 Nobody is predicting problems for the coming flight of the Atlantis, the 135th and last launching in the shuttle program. The event is scheduled for Friday at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, before an estimated one million spectators.        
 After that, there is little glory to look forward to. NASA has been forced to cancel the big missions that capture public attention and attract top talent, and frustrations have bubbled to the surface within the agency. Not only has the shuttle program been scrapped, but so has Constellation, which would have sent Americans back to the moon. Astronauts have been steadily leaving the agency.        
 At the direction of the Obama administration and Congress, NASA is instead developing a large new rocket to send deep into space. But no destination has been selected, and money is tight. NASA is also trying to nurture a commercial industry that will loft astronauts toward the stars. But the ventures, which involve partnerships with private-sector companies like SpaceX and Boeing, focus on hardware development and so far have no declared goals beyond low orbits around the planet. The shuttles did that for decades, starting in 1981.        
 In an interview last week, Charles F. Bolden Jr., NASA’s administrator and a former astronaut, said he had no misgivings about the last shuttle flight, and he heaped praise on the agency’s work force.        
 “Do we have concerns about morale?” he asked. “Yes, we always do. Do we have concerns about the welfare of our workers? Yes, we always do.”        
 But Mr. Bolden, a retired Marine Corps general, said his workers were excited not only about the Atlantis mission but also about a range of new endeavors at both the space agency and its commercial partners.        
 “We’re trying to help our people stay in the aerospace industry, if not in NASA,” he said while denying any paralyzing loss of talent. “We’re capturing the brainpower.”        
 And he flatly rejected the idea that the agency had lost its way.        
 “We’re not adrift,” he said. “And the vision is not gone. And we have a plan. We have a very sound plan.”        
 History has offered some bleak lessons, with tons of wreckage testifying to the danger. Experts say the Team B effect contributed to disasters in the mid-1980s and late 1990s that destroyed more than a dozen rockets, wiped out billions of dollars in satellites and threw the nation’s unpiloted space program into turmoil. The two catastrophes of the space shuttle program — in 1986 and 2003, which killed 14 astronauts — had more to do with design flaws and management failures than with depleted ranks of experts.        
 NASA officials say close examinations of failures and problematic retirements have made the agency smarter. “We went out and looked at who has done this well — and who has not,” said Bryan D. O’Connor, NASA’s chief of safety and mission assurance.        
 1 
 2 
Next Page »
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=8b1022bc1ee52e5aeee752122cb9948eOne of the hundreds of thousands of pieces of space-age litter orbiting Earth zipped uncomfortably close to the International Space Station on Tuesday.        
 
   Related
  Times Topic: International Space Station

  
 
   The six crew members of the space station took refuge in their “lifeboats” — two Soyuz space capsules they would use to escape a crippled station — as the unidentified object hurtled past them at a speed of 29,000 miles per hour, missing the space station by only 1,100 feet. The episode took place at 8:08 a.m. Eastern time.        
 “We believe the probability that it would the hit the station was about 1 in 360,” said Lark Howorth, who leads the team at NASA that tracks the space station’s trajectory. NASA rules call for precautions when the risk of impact is greater than 1 in 10,000.        
 In the section of the station run by the United States, astronauts closed the hatches in case the debris — commonly known as space junk — crashed through, to limit the danger of explosive decompression. To prepare for a rapid departure, the clamps holding the Soyuz capsules to the station were released.        
 “They would be one command away from releasing the hooks and undocking,” said Edward Van Cise, NASA’s lead flight director.        
 Mission controllers gave the all-clear signal four minutes later, and the crew members returned to work. There was no sign of damage or impact to the station.        
 It was only the second time in the 10-year history of people living on the space station that the crew needed to take such precautions; on March 12, 2009, a piece of an old satellite motor went zipping by.        
 If the station had been hit, the crew could have quickly undocked and returned to Earth. The risk of space junk hitting a Soyuz capsule is much slimmer.        
 Usually, when NASA gets a warning, several days in advance, that something that might come too close to the station, it moves the station by firing thrusters. Or, if a space shuttle happened to be visiting at the time, the shuttle would nudge the station out of danger. That has happened 12 times.        
 This time, however, the warning came Monday evening, less than 15 hours in advance, too little time to plan a maneuver.        
 Since the first artificial satellite, Sputnik 1, was launched was in 1957, the space neighborhood has become cluttered with human-made detritus — more than half a million pieces, by recent estimates, from the size of a marble on up. If the orbits of two intersect, the result can be a destructive collision.        
 “It’s getting kind of dangerous,” said Jonathan McDowell, an astrophysicist at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics who has become an expert on space debris. “Most active satellites now have a regular process of maneuvering to avoid debris.”        
 NASA estimates that for each six-month period, there is a 1-in-100 chance that some or all of the space station crew might need to evacuate, and most of that risk comes from the possibility of impact from debris or natural micrometeroids. Over 10 years, the current planned lifetime of the station, the cumulative risk is nearly one in five.        
 “It’s at the level where it probably won’t happen in the lifetime of the station, but it could easily,” Dr. McDowell said.        
 The debris includes spent rocket stages, and sometimes over time residual fuel combines and explodes. “You now no longer have a rocket stage,” Dr. McDowell said. “You have 500 pieces of shrapnel.”        
 Also still in orbit are broken satellites or almost incidental litter. In the past, lens covers on satellite cameras and sensors were simply popped off and left to float away. Now satellite makers put the lens cap on a hinge.        
 Military antisatellite tests also make a big mess, notably when the Chinese blew up one of their satellites in 2007.
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=81e528d815fd1cb4a03132734be81050Solved: the case of the missing moon dust.        
  The United States attorney’s office for eastern Missouri announced Thursday that it had recovered government property stolen more than 40 years ago: a triangular nub of transparent tape an eighth of an inch wide.        
 Unlike most missing office supplies, this tape was speckled with moon dust brought back by the Apollo 11 astronauts.        
 “It wasn’t much to look at, but I will never be that close to the moon again,” Richard G. Callahan, the United States attorney, said in a news release.        
 The item turned up last month at Regency-Superior, an auction house in St. Louis. The woman who put it up for sale, whose name was not released, told the authorities that her late husband had bought it some years earlier. When she learned of its history, she “immediately and graciously agreed to relinquish it back to the American people,” Mr. Callahan’s office said.        
 David M. Kols, president of Regency-Superior, said his auction house knew that selling moon rocks was illegal, but did not realize the prohibition extended to dust. The item was pulled from the auction, and investigators retrieved the tape last Friday. “I’ve never seen the government move so fast,” he said.        
 Preliminary tests by NASA indicated that bits of the moon were indeed stuck to the tape, although more complete tests will take two to three weeks.        
 The history of the tape and the dust was never much of a mystery, though. Terry Slezak, who now lives in Boerne, Tex., was a photographer in charge of processing the film brought back from the moon landings. When he opened one of the canisters, dust spilled out and coated his hands.        
 In a telephone interview Thursday, he said he remembered carefully cleaning the film magazine with towels and tape to prevent the dust from scratching the film. He then hung the tape in his darkroom. Later, presented with a poster board of photographs signed by the Apollo 11 astronauts, “I added the little piece of Scotch tape with the moon dust on it,” he said. “I thought that would be kind of neat.”        
 Mr. Slezak said that no one from NASA or law enforcement had ever questioned him about the tape, even when he sold the poster at an auction in 2001.        
 A German collector of space memorabilia bought the poster — including the dusty tape, which was about an inch long and was subsequently cut into smaller pieces and sold.        
 Mr. Slezak was a bit surprised to hear of the legal hubbub. “I haven’t seen or heard tell of this thing for a long time,” he said.
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=d015a167db411bd632be53b110d5a72fThese plumes originate from a saltwater reservoir, according to a new study published online by the journal Nature.        
 “We discovered that the plume is stratified in a composition of ice,” said Frank Postberg , an astrophysicist at the University of Heidelberg in Germany. “And the lower you go, the more salt-rich ice grains you find.”        
 Dr. Postberg and his collaborators analyzed samples of ice particles from the plumes gathered by NASA’s Cassini spacecraft.        
 The analysis found that salt-rich particles make up more than 99 percent of the solids ejected in Enceladus’s plumes.        
 The researchers theorize that there are actually two reservoirs connected to the plumes. The first is a saltwater reservoir close to the moon’s surface that is directly feeding the plumes.        
 But feeding this reservoir, there is most likely a larger, deeper saltwater reservoir, Dr. Postberg said.        
 “We imagine that between the ice and the ice core there is an ocean of depth and this is somehow connected to the surface reservoir,” he said.        
 Enceladus, Saturn’s sixth moon, is icy and just over 300 miles wide. The presence of water makes it one of a few other places in the solar system where life could exist.        
 But even if this isn’t the case, it makes life beyond Earth seem more plausible, Dr. Postberg said.        
 “If there is water in such an unexpected place,” he said, “it leaves possibility for the rest of the universe.”
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=fe8ac38a322284b94778fda12978402fThe Texas Tribune
 U.T. Experiment Grapples With Essence of Gravity
  By MICHAEL HOINSKI
  Published: June 18, 2011    
      Sign In to E-Mail 
  Print 
              Reprints 
    
 
 
 
      We have all experienced gravity, but even to the brightest minds in science, it remains largely a mystery. Gary J. Hill, an astronomer at the University of Texas at Austin, is trying to change that.        
 
    Enlarge This Image
    
 Martin Harris/McDonald Observatory
 Sky reflects in the primary mirror of the Hobby-Eberly telescope at the McDonald Observatory. The mirror, partly obscured, is made of 91 segments.                            
 
   Expanded coverage of Texas is produced by The Texas Tribune, a nonprofit news organization. To join the conversation about this article, go to texastribune.org.
 
  
 
   “We don’t know why there’s gravity,” said Mr. Hill, one of the lead astronomers on the Hobby-Eberly Telescope Dark Energy Experiment, or Hetdex, which could turn gravity’s time-honored laws on their head. “We have a pretty good theory of it. It may be that our observations could have a bearing on finally formulating why gravity exists.”        
 Mr. Hill has teamed with Karl Gebhardt, an astronomy professor at U.T., on the $36 million project, which has prevailed despite the threat of natural disasters, potential lack of financing and all the kinks that can throw off a long-term project. The experiment’s goal is to analyze our understanding of how the universe is expanding — with ramifications on gravity, the Big Bang theory and the fate of the universe.        
 “Not only is the universe expanding, but it’s accelerating,” Mr. Gebhardt said. “And so that’s what we call dark energy — the existence of the acceleration. And that’s the huge thing that no one can explain.”        
 Granted, in a time of high unemployment, crazy gas prices and water shortages, studying the swelling of the universe might seem out of touch. But when asked about its importance, Steven Weinberg, a Nobel Prize-winning physicist at U.T., said, “Do you really need a sermon on why settling questions about the fundamental laws of nature are worth pursuing?”        
 For Mr. Hill, 48, and Mr. Gebhardt, 46, even to be in position of rewriting the books is fortunate. The McDonald Observatory — where the dark-energy observations, made with the third-largest telescope in the world, are set to begin next spring after nearly 10 years of development — is about 425 miles west of Austin, in Fort Davis. In April, the Rock House Fire, which started 35 miles south of there, in Marfa, scorched the Davis Mountains surrounding the state-of-the-art observatory, putting it perilously close to going up in flames.        
 Mother Nature has not been the only threat. Lack of financing for an abstract experiment with little or no immediate pay-off has stymied several similar projects that sprang from the discovery of dark energy in 1998. Now, only a handful of those remain, and none have the proprietary will of Hetdex — a testament to the ego of the state of Texas.        
 Nearly a third of the money raised for Hetdex, which includes a one-of-its-kind $16 million spectrograph created by Mr. Hill called Virus (Visible Integral-Field Replicable Unit Spectrograph), came from private in-state sources. The largest donor, Harold Simmons, a Dallas investor and U.T. alumnus whom Forbes magazine ranked as the 55th-richest person in the United States, gave two gifts totaling $6.5 million. (Mr. Simmons’s family foundation is a major donor to The Texas Tribune.)        
 “I could see that figuring out the nature of dark energy would be of historic importance, not just in astronomy but for all science, and for all humankind,” Mr. Simmons said in an e-mail. “As a proud Texan, I wanted a Texas-based, Texas-led project to be first.”        
 Meanwhile, broader debate has recently emerged over the role of academic research in state universities, with some conservatives calling for a greater emphasis on teaching to improve efficiency. But many in the higher education community have argued that the benefits of research extend beyond universities’ bottom lines.        
 “This is helping us train the next generation of engineers and leaders in these fields of technology,” Mr. Gebhardt said of Hetdex, which derives about a quarter of its financing from U.T. and a $6 million special biennial line item in the state budget. “And that’s important because we don’t have a lot of that in the country.”        
 The impact on education goes even deeper, Mr. Hill said, explaining: “Kids, when they’re 5 or 6 or 7, these are the ones who get interested in science through fields like paleontology and astronomy. These are exciting areas.”        
 Where the education system falls short, Mr. Hill added, “is failing to take that excitement and actually train them so they remain excited through college.”        
 The McDonald Observatory’s history also provides a valuable lesson in collaboration.        
 On a recent tour, Thomas Barnes, the observatory’s superintendent, said U.T. did not even have an astronomy department in 1926, when William Johnson McDonald, a banker from Paris, Tex., bequeathed his $1.1 million fortune to start an observatory. U.T. enlisted the University of Chicago to design and build the operation under the direction of Otto Struve, a Russian-born, fourth-generation astronomer who operated the McDonald Observatory for 30 years, ushering it into the U.T.-led era.        
 “Better a foreigner than a damn Yankee,” one of the U.T. regents at the time said of Mr. Struve’s appointment, according to Mr. Barnes.        
 And now the U.T. astronomy department has a chance to enhance its history.        
 “There will only be one time when we figure out what is in the universe, and then it gets placed in the textbooks,” Mr. Gebhardt said. “We are basically living through that time now.”        
  mhoinski@gmail.com
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=73be73e5e28a768489fcd12669f9f457For years, many planetary scientists did not express much curiosity about Mercury, which looked gray and cratered — a slightly larger version of the Moon.        
 
    Enlarge This Image
    
 Reuters
 New findings show that some of Mercury’s topography is not seen elsewhere in the solar system.                            
 
  Related
    In NASA’s Lens, Mercury Comes Into Focus (March 31, 2011) 
 
  
 
   But data released Thursday from NASA’s Mercury Messenger spacecraft, which entered orbit around Mercury in March, is painting a more vibrant picture of the solar system’s innermost planet.        
 “Mercury ain’t the Moon,” Ralph L. McNutt Jr., the mission’s project scientist, said at a NASA news conference on Thursday.        
 Among the new findings: Some of Mercury’s topography is not seen anywhere else in the solar system — rimless pits, for instance — and its mineralogy is vastly different from the Moon’s, whose rocks have much less potassium. Scientists already knew that Mercury has a magnetic field, while the Moon does not.        
 The latest batch of data includes the clearest pictures yet of Mercury’s polar regions, plus readings of the elements in its crust, which have helped scientists rule out some theories about the planet’s origins. Mercury Messenger has also discovered that the planet’s magnetic field is stronger in its northern hemisphere than in its southern, which hints at something odd in the structure of its molten core.        
 The new information could reveal how Mercury formed and changed over the 4.5-billion-year history of the solar system, which in turn could help astronomers understand the panoply of Earth-size planets around other stars and the possibility of conditions friendly for life on them. NASA’s Kepler telescope has discovered dozens of possible Earth-size planets, but its observations can determine little beyond their size.        
 “We have in our solar system four experiments in how four Earthlike planets evolve once they form under slightly different conditions,” said Sean C. Solomon, the principal investigator for Mercury Messenger, referring to Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars, the four rocky planets of the inner solar system.        
 “What we’re learning is that each of those experiments had an extraordinarily different outcome,” Dr. Solomon said. “And one of those experiments we live on. So it really behooves us, in a very general way, to understand how Earthlike planets form and evolve and operate.”        
 One of the mysteries is why the iron core of Mercury is unusually large, extending out three-quarters of the way to the surface. Earth’s core, by contrast, extends a little more than halfway.        
 One idea was that Mercury was originally larger, and the young Sun was so intense that the radiation stripped away the outer layers, leaving behind the Mercury seen today. But that theory predicted low abundances of certain elements like potassium that would have easily evaporated in the intense heat. Mercury Messenger measured ample amounts of potassium.        
 “We can rule out this kind of model,” said Larry R. Nittler, a staff scientist at the Carnegie Institution of Washington and a member of the science team.        
 Another theory is that Mercury formed out of metal-rich meteorites. By and large, the observed composition of the surface rocks does not fit with that theory either, although a variation could still prove the correct explanation, Dr. Nittler said.        
 A third idea is that a giant impact early in Mercury’s history knocked off a large fraction of the planet. “This is the model that is still in the running,” Dr. Nittler said. “There are probably going to be many more models devised before we have an answer on this.”        
 High-resolution images of craters revealed irregular pits, ranging in width from several hundred feet to a few miles. The pits do not have rims like craters produced by impacts, leading the scientists to speculate that they were etched by some unstable material that evaporated quickly when exposed at the surface.        
 Mercury Messenger’s one-year mission around the planet is only one-quarter done, so more information about the planet will be forthcoming. Already, Dr. Solomon said, the orbiter has dispelled the misconception that Mercury is a boring place, and that what NASA’s Mariner 10 spacecraft saw in 1974 and 1975 during three flybys was all that was to be seen.        
 “Some even in the planetary community, after the Mariner 10 mission, placed a low priority on returning a spacecraft to Mercury on the grounds that it was very much like the Moon, we’d been to the Moon,” Dr. Solomon said. “It was an example, to use a phrase coined by a very famous space scientist, of ‘one of the burnt-out cinders of the solar system.’ And it is anything but that.”
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=2d925f6239178690d45d2f748f7c6c4bThe event, which was observed on March 28, was originally thought to be a gamma ray burst from a collapsing star, but researchers suspected something more sinister was at play. Their findings appear in a pair of papers published online by the journal Science.        
 Traditional gamma ray bursts involve a deluge of high-energy photons bursting through space. They generally result from the explosion of a star or when two objects collide.        
 In this case the burst was unusually long, said Joshua Bloom, an associate professor of astronomy at Berkeley and the first author of one of the studies.        
 The burst also came from the center of a galaxy four billion light years away. Most galaxies are thought to have black holes at their center, a clue that tipped off Dr. Bloom and his colleagues.        
 “Astronomers are not so different from real estate agents — location, location, location,” he said. “This picture had emerged for me and I saw that this was a black hole swallowing up a star.”        
 The team used data gathered by the Swift Gamma Burst Mission, the Hubble Space Telescope and the Chandra X-ray Observatory to confirm their theory.        
 They also studied historical data to look for similar events involving the same black hole, but they found no other occurrences.        
 “This is a singular event in the history of mankind,” Dr. Bloom said. “This black hole was otherwise sitting dormant, a star got too close, its gas got ripped apart and in doing so some of it got spit up.”        
 There are still a number of unanswered questions that the researchers are exploring, like how large the star was in comparison to the sun, how close it got to the black hole and role of the hole’s spin in the event.
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=0b8643f3bb6c5ece3e69822369c268b3Published: June 15, 2011    
      Sign In to E-Mail 
  Print 
              Reprints 
    
 
 
 
      Iran said it launched a satellite into orbit on Wednesday that Western aerospace experts said could be used for limited military reconnaissance and also to monitor crops and track damage from earthquakes, flooding and other natural disasters.        
  It was the second time that an Iranian rocket had carried a satellite into orbit and took place more than two years after Iran joined the international space club by launching its first satellite.        
 Iran released few details about the satellite, which it calls Rasad-1, or Observation-1. Western experts said it weighed about 100 pounds — meaning that the light payload and the modest rocket carrying it bore little resemblance to an intercontinental missile and its heavy warhead.        
 Still, aerospace experts said the successful launching demonstrated Iranian engineers’ growing skill and contrasted with the repeated failures endured by North Korea in trying to place payloads into orbit.        
 “It’s a significant step forward for the Iranians,” said Charles P. Vick, an expert on Iranian rockets at GlobalSecurity.org, a private research group in Alexandria, Va.        
 Still, it did not come as a surprise to those who monitor Iran’s efforts. “Everybody’s been expecting this,” said Marcia S. Smith, founder of SpacePolicyOnline.com, a news blog in Arlington, Va.        
 Mr. Vick noted that the Iranians had announced that Rasad-1 would be lofted last summer, but the mission then was delayed.        
 “It’s taken them far longer than they advertised,” Mr. Vick said in an interview.        
 The reason, he added, appeared to be managerial failures and “sanctions that have been having a significant impact on their getting foreign technology and hardware.”        
 He described the Iranian satellite as an experimental craft designed mainly for tracking the Earth’s resources from space. But the spacecraft, he said, “could also be used for low-resolution reconnaissance.”        
 Iranian news reports said that the Rasad-1 was built by the Malek-Ashtar University. Analysts in the American intelligence community view the university as having close ties to the Revolutionary Guard, the Islamic Republic’s main enforcers.        
 Iranian scientists have long hailed the benefits of Earth-observation satellites for tracking floods, fighting fires, gauging earthquake damage, finding evacuation routes and identifying high-risk areas.        
 In February, President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad announced plans to launch several Iranian-built satellites this year, including at least one for reconnaissance. He also repeated a claim that Tehran would send an Iranian astronaut into space by 2020.        
 Iran placed its first satellite into orbit in February 2009. The nation’s 5,000 rial banknote, the equivalent of 50 cents, bears the satellite’s image. The Iranians called it a rudimentary communications craft.        
 The announcement of the launching on Wednesday came on the country’s Arabic-language television channel, Al-Alam.        
 The channel said a rocket known as Safir, or messenger, fired the satellite into an orbit with a maximum height of 162 miles. “It is capable of photographing the Earth,” the report said of the satellite.        
 The channel said Rasad-1 would circle the Earth 15 times a day and should operate for two months. Iranian media reports have said the Safir rocket can carry a satellite weighing 110 pounds into elliptical orbits as high as 280 miles.        
 Western nations fear that Iran is trying to develop a missile capability under cover of its space program that could also threaten to deliver nuclear warheads.        
 Iran denies that it has any ambition to develop an atom bomb and asserts that both its space and nuclear programs are peaceful.        
 But it is openly developing a group of increasingly large rockets. In theory, the biggest might eventually be powerful enough to hurl not only satellites into space, but also warheads between continents.
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=30ab76c4e30d74fe8bc3d906fcf2f953The nation’s space agency plans to spend about half a billion dollars next year to replenish the pension fund of the contractor that has supplied thousands of workers to the space shuttle program.        
 
    Enlarge This Image
    
 Jim Grossmann/NASA
 In March, United Space Alliance technicians in Florida removed an engine from the shuttle Discovery, preparing it for retirement.                            
 
  Add to Portfolio
  Boeing Company
 Lockheed Martin
  Go to your Portfolio »
 
 
    The shuttle program accounts for a vast majority of the business of United Space Alliance, originally a joint venture of Boeing and Lockheed Martin. With the demise of the shuttle program, United Space Alliance will be left without a source of revenue to keep its pension plan afloat. So the company wants to terminate its family of pension plans, covering 11,000 workers and retirees, and continue as a smaller, nimbler concern to compete for other contracts.        
 Normally, a company that lost a lifeblood contract would have little choice but to declare bankruptcy and ask the federal insurer, the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, to take over its pensions. But that insurer limits benefits, meaning not everyone gets as much as they had been promised. United Space Alliance’s plan also allows participants to take their pensions as a single check and includes retiree health benefits, neither of which would be permitted by the pension insurer.        
 United Space Alliance, however, has a rare pledge from a different government agency to pay the bill. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration says in its contract with the company that it will cover its pension costs “to the extent they are otherwise allowable, allocable and reasonable.” NASA interprets this to include the cost of terminating its pension plans outside of bankruptcy.        
 The pension fund now has about half the amount needed. The president’s budget proposal for the 2012 fiscal year requests $547.9 million for NASA to provide the rest. That is nearly 3 percent of the agency’s total budget and just about what the Science Mission Directorate at NASA spent last year on all grants and subsidies to study climate change, planetary systems and the origins of life in the universe.        
 “We know that it’s NASA’s obligation to fund this, and NASA will do so,” said a spokesman for the space agency, Michael Curie.        
 Other federal agencies have made promises to pay contractors’ annual pension costs — the Energy Department, for example, for companies that run nuclear sites — and some government auditors have been warning for years that investment oversight was lacking and that the potential costs had been underestimated. This appears to be the first time, though, that a company’s main contract has expired and an agency has had to bear the cost of terminating its plans.        
 Although NASA was reimbursing the contractor for the annual pension contributions, it had no say over how the money was invested. United Space Alliance put most of the money into stocks.        
 The backstop will be unusually costly because of market conditions. While United Space Alliance has made its required contributions every year, the fund lost nearly $200 million in the market turmoil of 2008 and 2009. When interest rates are very low, as they have been, the cost of the promises rises rapidly as well, creating a bigger shortfall.        
 The cash infusion is also being readied at a time when some members of Congress are demanding cuts in spending and threatening to block anything that could be construed as a taxpayer bailout.        
 “It’s unfortunate that it’s coming in this fiscal environment,” said Bill Hill, NASA assistant associate administrator for the space shuttle.        
 He said that he hoped Congress would appropriate the money before the fiscal year ended on Sept. 30. If not, he said, NASA will have to divert funds from space-related activities.        
 Already, United Space Alliance has had five rounds of layoffs and has shrunk to about 5,600 employees from a peak of 10,500. Its workers have performed a wide range of jobs for the space shuttle program, mostly in Florida.        
 Beth Robinson, chief financial officer of NASA, said that even if United Space Alliance declared bankruptcy at this point, the pension agency would go after NASA for some of the cost. She said the contract was issued during a stock market boom, with a clause saying that if the plans should terminate with a surplus, the extra money would go to NASA. At the time, no one expected them to terminate with a deficit.        
 The cost of the termination may fluctuate along with market conditions as Congress considers what to do.        
 Tracy E. Yates, a spokeswoman for United Space Alliance, said the company could not predict the outcome. “However, we have not seen or heard anything to date that indicates that NASA will not receive funding for this obligation,” she said.        
 1 
 2 
Next Page »
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=46c9f044c89ed509367d67757bd72c1aKENNEDY SPACE CENTER, Fla. — NASA, it seems, is having trouble letting go.        
 
    Enlarge This Image
    
 Joe Skipper/Reuters
 The shuttle Endeavour landing Wednesday in Florida. Engineers are scavenging parts before the shuttles go on display.                            
 
 
   As the agency gets its space shuttles ready to be shipped out to museums, it will not be sending them off lock, stock and barrel. The crews doing the prep work have been flooded with requests to squirrel away parts of the spacecraft for analysis. Valves, flight-control instruments, even the tires and windows — little is safe from the clutches of NASA engineers.        
 “I’ve got a list of hundreds of items that have to come off the ship,” said Stephanie S. Stilson, who is directing the preparation of the shuttle Discovery for delivery to the Smithsonian Institution next year in what NASA calls its “transition and retirement” program.        
 In April, NASA named the permanent old-age homes for its shuttles, which have been escorting astronauts to space for 30 years. The Endeavour, which completed its last mission early Wednesday with a pinpoint landing after 16 days in orbit, will bask in glory only briefly before it is groomed for delivery to the California Science Center in Los Angeles. The Atlantis, which will make its final flight next month, is destined to live at the visitors’ center here at the space center.        
 The Discovery made its last flight in March and now sits in a maintenance bay, enclosed by platforms that would normally be crawling with workers inspecting and maintaining its many systems — including the thousands of thermal tiles that cover its skin — to be ready for its next liftoff. These days, as the shuttle program winds down and the staff has been winnowed by layoffs, technicians work on the Discovery only when there are no more pressing tasks. And rather than sprucing it up for another trip to space, likely as not they are taking something out of it.        
 “We in engineering, we want to hold on to things that we could potentially use, or we want to study them, which is a smart thing to do,” Ms. Stilson said. The shuttles are the only spacecraft that have been launched into orbit multiple times — the Discovery is the most-traveled, with 39 missions — and a better understanding of how the materials and equipment have fared could help future aerospace designers.        
 Ms. Stilson spoke near one of the Discovery’s main landing gears, where the tires used on the last flight had been removed in favor of what NASA calls “roll-around tires” — basically a bunch of old spares. On a higher platform, workers were putting the finishing touches on replacement windows for the spacecraft, the originals having been taken out so engineers could study what effect the microdebris encountered in so many trips in space had on the glass.        
 While those who are to receive the shuttles say they understand the need for research, they are a little surprised by how much will be missing.        
 “We’re considered to be the nation’s official repository of our past,” said Valerie Neal, curator for contemporary human spaceflight at the Smithsonian, which will display the Discovery at the National Air and Space Museum’s annex near Dulles Airport. “Our point of view would be to receive an orbiter in as intact a state as possible.”        
 Ms. Neal said that when she first started discussing the fate of the shuttle with NASA several years ago, “I rather naïvely thought it would be intact.”        
 Some of the removal work is dictated by safety concerns. There are small explosive charges all around the shuttle, including one designed to blow a latch and deploy the front landing gear should the normal systems fail. Although the firing mechanism has been disabled, “We don’t want to take a chance that if it’s sitting in the Smithsonian it could somehow detonate,” Ms. Stilson said.        
 The thrusters near the shuttle’s nose and the podlike maneuvering engines in the rear both contain propellants that are highly toxic and corrosive, even in tiny amounts. So these components have been removed and sent to a special facility where workers in hazardous materials suits will “cut and gut” them, removing much of the insides before shipping them back. “We’ll reinstall them, and from the outside they’ll look exactly the same,” Ms. Stilson said.        
 1 
 2 
Next Page »
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=d2fc8ea293cba745384e317f6581d52fIt is not raining on the Moon, but it does seem to be getting wetter and wetter.        
 
    Enlarge This Image
    
 Thomas Weinreich/Department of Geological Sciences, Brown University
 A lunar melt inclusion from an Apollo 17 sample, enclosed within an olivine crystal.                            
 
 
   For decades, the prevailing view of the Moon was that it was dry. Then, two years ago, a NASA probe crashed into a deep crater near the Moon’s south pole and confirmed large amounts of water ice within the shadows. Meanwhile, measurements by an orbiting Indian spacecraft suggested that a veneer of water, generated by the bombardment of solar wind particles, covered much of the Moon’s surface.        
 Now, scientists analyzing tiny fragments of hardened lava from long-ago lunar eruptions report that the fragments contain about as much water as similar magmas on Earth, meaning there is plenty of water inside the Moon too.        
 “I have to admit, we were a little surprised,” said Erik H. Hauri, a staff scientist in geochemistry at the Carnegie Institution of Washington and lead author of a paper published Thursday in the journal Science.        
 Dr. Hauri’s surprise comes despite the fact that he and several of his co-authors predicted three years ago that they would find that much water. Back then, they looked at tiny beads of volcanic glass — the beads were about the size of periods in printed text — in soil brought back by Apollo astronauts. The beads contained water, but not a lot a lot of it: a maximum of 46 parts per million — or 0.0046 percent water. Their models suggested that 95 percent of the water originally in the hot magma escaped as it cooled.        
 Dr. Hauri acknowledged that the extrapolation was less than ironclad. “That’s sticking your neck out pretty far,” he said.        
 The new work started when another member of the research team, Alberto E. Saal, a professor of geological sciences at Brown University, handed a vial of Moon dirt to Thomas Weinreich, a Brown freshman, and asked him to sift through it for interesting particles.        
 As Mr. Weinreich laboriously examined the soil, grain by grain, under a microscope, he found, mixed among the glass beads, some clear crystals; some of those crystals contained a tiny amount of glass.        
 The crystals, made of the mineral olivine, prevented any of the water in the enclosed glass from escaping. The amount of water in the trapped glass was 20 to 100 times what had been previously measured in the glass beads, comparable to the water content of some Earth magmas.        
 “There is a reservoir down there in the Moon that has the same concentration of water as some reservoirs in the upper mantle of Earth,” Dr. Saal said. “That’s for sure.”        
 What is much less certain is how large the underground water-rich reservoir might be. Last year, researchers led by Zachary D. Sharp of the University of New Mexico came to the exact opposite conclusion. Based on concentrations of chlorine isotopes in lunar rocks, they concluded that the rocks must have hardened out of lava that contained almost no water.        
 But if the interior of the Moon turns out to contain considerable water, then the ice at the bottom of lunar craters may have come from volcanic eruptions rather than comet impacts.        
 The finding would also throw a new wrinkle into explanations of how the Moon formed in the aftermath of a collision between the Earth and a Mars-size interloper about 4.6 billion years ago. The cataclysm would have created a ring of debris at an intensely hot temperature — in the thousands of degrees. And the expectation of many scientists is that any water would have escaped into space before the debris coalesced into a dry moon.        
 “It’s frankly a confusing picture,” said David J. Stevenson, a professor of planetary science at the California Institute of Technology. The giant impact theory provides a satisfying explanation for the orbit, size and basic physical characteristics of the Moon. But scientists have not been able to fully explain what makes up the Moon, and the water finding potentially adds another mystery.        
 “What you will find among geochemists, cosmic chemists, there’s still some doubt there,” Dr. Stevenson said. “They say, ‘That’s a wonderful story, but how does it fit my data?’ ”
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=f70901eb783910a571f2657d72f37df8The Spirit is dead.        
 
    Enlarge This Image
    
 NASA, via Reuters
 A composite panoramic image of NASA's Spirit rover from October 2007 showed dust on the solar panels.                            
 
 
   NASA said on Tuesday that it was abandoning efforts to get back in touch with Spirit, one of the two rovers on Mars. Spirit, which has been stuck in a sand trap for two years, fell silent last year as winter arrived and its solar panels could no longer generate enough electricity. Engineers had hoped that the rover would revive when spring returned, but they never heard from it again.        
 Now, as the Martian days grow shorter, Spirit’s managers decided that it was not worth the time and money to continue.        
 “We couldn’t recover any of the approved science objectives that we had for Spirit even if we heard from the rover, which is very unlikely,” said John Callas, the project manager for Spirit and its twin, Opportunity, which continues to operate on the other side of the planet.        
 The last set of commands to Spirit will be sent early Wednesday morning.        
 The Spirit and Opportunity rovers landed on Mars in January 2004, their original mission scheduled to last just three months. At first, it did not seem that Spirit would last even that long. A computer memory glitch disabled it three weeks after landing.        
 After engineers diagnosed and fixed the problem, the two rovers defied expectations with each passing anniversary. Both discovered evidence that Mars, which is cold and dry today, once had plentiful water at its surface.        
 Spirit did age over time. In 2006, its right front wheel failed. From then, it mostly drove backward, dragging the lame wheel through the soil. “It reveals stuff below the surface, and it reveals stuff that we would have just driven by because it’s camouflaged under the ground,” Dr. Callas said.        
 One of those discoveries was a material called amorphous silica, which scientists believe formed in an ancient hydrothermal system.        
 In May 2009, Spirit’s wheels broke through a thin crust into a hidden sand trap. Attempts to get it out only drove it deeper. Then a second wheel failed.        
 Last year, NASA announced that Spirit would continue operations as a stationary science station, observing the atmosphere and measuring the wobble in Mars’ axis of rotation.         
 But winter was approaching, which proved to be Spirit’s demise.        
 Opportunity is continuing its drive to a large crater named Endeavour, where scientists hope it will offer a close-up view of clay deposits that have been observed from orbit.        
 Clay forms in water, and the minerals left behind could provide important new clues about the history of Mars.        
 At its current pace, and if all goes well, Opportunity could arrive at Endeavour by the fall.
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=cbb712dccaa4dc3f2c069f9f94f0d320It was the spring of 1961. President John F. Kennedy, speaking of new frontiers and projecting the vigor of youth, had been in office barely four months, and April had been the cruelest.        
 
   

  Multimedia
 
      Interactive Feature  
  Mission to the Moon
  
 
 
      Slide Show  
  Readers’ Moon Memories
  
 
 
    Enlarge This Image
    
 NASA, via Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
 ACCOMPLISHED President Kennedy addressed Congress and a national TV audience on May 25, 1961, calling for his lunar goal to be met before 1970.                            More Photos » 
 
 
    On the 12th, Yuri Gagarin became the first human to orbit Earth — one more space triumph for the Soviet Union. Though the flight was not unexpected, it was nonetheless deflating; it would be more than a month before Alan Shepard became the first American in space, and that was on a 15-minute suborbital flight. On the 17th, a force of anti-Castro exiles, trained by the C.I.A., invaded communist Cuba at the Bay of Pigs — a fiasco within 36 hours. Mr. Kennedy’s close aide Theodore Sorensen described him on the 19th as “anguished and fatigued” and “in the most emotional, self-critical state I had ever seen him.”        
 At one meeting, his brother Robert F. Kennedy, the attorney general, “turned on everybody,” it was reported, saying: “All you bright fellows. You got the president into this. We’ve got to do something to show the Russians we are not paper tigers.” At another, the president pleaded: “If somebody can, just tell me how to catch up. Let’s find somebody — anybody. I don’t care if it’s the janitor over there.” Heading back to the Oval Office, he told Mr. Sorensen, “There’s nothing more important.”        
 So, 50 years ago, on May 25, 1961, President Kennedy addressed a joint session of Congress and a national television audience, declaring: “I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to Earth.”        
 There it was, the challenge flung before an adversary and to a nation on edge in an unconventional war, the beginning of Project Apollo.        
 Echoes of this time lift off the pages of “John F. Kennedy and the Race to the Moon” (Palgrave Macmillan), a new book by John M. Logsdon, a political scientist and longtime space policy specialist at George Washington University. He has drawn on new research in archives, oral histories and memoirs available in recent years to shed new light on the moon race.        
 The famous speech came after five weeks of hand wringing, back-channel memos and closed-door conferences, often overseen by Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson. In those meetings NASA and Pentagon officials, scientists and engineers, budget analysts and others decided that sending astronauts to the Moon by the end of the sixties was the country’s best shot at overcoming the Soviet post-Sputnik command of the orbital front in the cold war.        
 But, Dr. Logsdon said in an interview last week, the new material highlighted some recurring themes that had been overlooked, like Mr. Kennedy’s return, time and again, to the idea of engaging the Russians in a cooperative venture, his continuing support of the project through a time of doubt, and how little was known then of Soviet capabilities and intentions.        
 Most of all, Dr. Logsdon said, hindsight had made him aware of his blindness to Apollo’s implications for the long run. He said he had been wrong, in a 1970 book on the subject, to think that the lunar decision “can be generalized to tell us how to proceed toward other “great new American enterprises.”        
 And like many others who for years lived and breathed the project, he finally had to recognize that the “impact of Apollo on the space program has on balance been negative.” It was, he explained, not the beginning of human voyages to Mars and lunar bases but “a dead-end undertaking in terms of human travel beyond the immediate vicinity of this planet.”        
 Of course, it takes two to have a race. The American president could not be sure the Russians had a lunar-landing program. There was no evidence that the Russians were building facilities for a booster capable of launching people to the Moon. Was the president just double-dog-daring them to come out in the schoolyard and show their stuff?        
 An intelligence report in 1962 had nothing to add, short of speculating that “the chances are better than even that a lunar landing is a Soviet objective.” Only in 1964 did intelligence agents detect signs that there was indeed someone to make it a race.        
 Initially, NASA set its sights on late 1967 for the landing attempt. As spending escalated, Apollo ran into its first sharp criticism in Congress, the science establishment and the news media in 1963. “Even some of the Kennedy advisers were eager to slip the end-of-decade date and relieve the pressure, mainly to save money,” Dr. Logsdon said.        
 1 
 2 
Next Page »
  This article has been revised to reflect the following correction:
Correction: May 27, 2011

A picture caption with an essay on Tuesday about the early days of the Apollo manned spaceflight program, using information provided by a photo agency, misstated the location and date of the image in which President John F. Kennedy and other officials reviewed scale models of booster rockets and missiles. The photo was taken in Cape Canaveral, Fla., on Sept. 11, 1962, not in Houston on Sept. 12, 1962.
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=33538d13550e5f213675eb268abcbda0Published: May 19, 2011    
      Sign In to E-Mail 
  Print 
              Reprints 
    
 
 
 
      KENNEDY SPACE CENTER, Fla. — The astronauts aboard the space shuttle Endeavour attached a $2 billion cosmic ray detector to the International Space Station on Thursday, and delighted scientists immediately began detecting “thousands and thousands” of subatomic particles from deep space.        
 
    Enlarge This Image
    
 NASA, via Reuters
 Cmdr. Mark Kelly of the Endeavour and Cady Coleman, a flight engineer, speak from the space station.                            
 
  Related
  Times Topic: Antimatter, Antiparticles

  
   Enlarge This Image
    
 The New York Times; Illustration by Frank O'Connell
  
 
 
   Equipped with a powerful magnet and an intricate array of sensors, computer processors and high-speed data links, the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer is designed to measure tiny deflections in the trajectories of cosmic ray particles to look for the telltale signs of antimatter and the unseen dark matter believed to make up nearly 25 percent of the universe.        
 It also will be on the lookout for the unexpected as it sifts through torrents of passing protons, electrons and atomic nuclei for the next 10 years or longer, ideally for the remaining life of the space station.        
 “We immediately checked all the detectors; everything functioned properly,” Samuel Chao Chung Ting, the project’s principal investigator, told reporters. “Not a single one was broken, not a single electronic channel was malfunctioning. Right away, we began to see an enormous amount of data coming down.”        
 Holding up sample graphs showing the passages of an electron and a carbon nucleus, Dr. Ting said, “We’re very pleased. It took us 17 years to build this thing.” Over time, he said, the scientists on the project hope “to make an important contribution to our understanding of the origin of the universe.”        
 Carried aloft in Endeavour’s cargo bay, the 7 1/2-ton Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer was attached to the right side of the space station’s solar power truss using the orbiter’s robot arm and a similar crane on the lab complex. After the instrument was locked in place, an umbilical carrying power and data was attached by remote control.        
 Within two to three hours, scientists and engineers at the Johnson Space Center in Houston were receiving a steady stream of data. “We have thousands and thousands of signatures already,” Dr. Ting said, referring to particle signatures.        
 It was a welcome, long-awaited milestone for a project with a history that reads like “The Perils of Pauline.”        
 After the 2003 explosion of the space shuttle Columbia, the project was bumped from NASA’s manifest. A lobbying campaign by Dr. Ting and his colleagues eventually won over President Obama and key lawmakers, who approved financing for an extra shuttle flight to get the particle-detecting magnet into orbit.        
 But a decision to extend the space station’s life from 2015 to 2020 and beyond prompted Dr. Ting’s team to give up a more powerful but short-lived superconducting magnet in favor of a less powerful version, used in a 1998 test flight, that could last the life of the station.        
 All told, Dr. Ting and his team — more than 600 physicists from 60 institutions in 16 countries — have spent nearly two decades designing, building, testing and redesigning the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer. The payoff is finally at hand.        
 One of the mysteries the device was designed to explore is what happened to the antimatter that must have been created when the universe was born.        
 “If the universe comes from a big bang, before the big bang it is vacuum,” Dr. Ting said before Endeavour’s launching. “Nothing exists in vacuum.”        
 In the beginning, he said, “You have matter, you must have antimatter; otherwise we would not have come from the vacuum.        
 “So now the universe is 14 billion years old, you have all of us, made out of matter. The question is, where is the universe made out of antimatter?”        
 Another subject of study for the spectrometer is dark matter, the mysterious material believed to provide the gravitational glue that holds galaxies and clusters of galaxies together. While Dr. Ting’s creation cannot directly detect dark matter, it possibly can detect the particles that would be produced in dark matter collisions.        
 “To my collaborators and I, the most exciting objective of A.M.S. is to probe the unknown,” Dr. Ting said, “to search for phenomena which exist in nature, but yet we have not the tools or the imagination to find.”        
 Meanwhile, as NASA continued its advances in space, on Earth — in Washington — it was scolded for tardiness in deciding what it will do after the shuttles are retired in July.        
 Leaders of the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation sent a letter to Maj. Gen. Charles F. Bolden Jr., the NASA administrator, demanding documents detailing how the agency was carrying out the blueprint Congress passed last year for future space exploration. The plans called for development of a new heavy-lift rocket and spacecraft for missions beyond low-Earth orbit.        
 The senators said NASA had failed to provide required reports to Congress and requested that a NASA official begin briefing them every other week about the agency’s efforts.        
 “NASA’s current inaction and indecision in implementing this transition could impact our global standing and take many years and billions of dollars to repair,” said the letter, signed by Senators John D. Rockefeller IV, a Democrat of West Virginia who is chairman of the committee; Kay Bailey Hutchison of Texas, the ranking Republican member; Bill Nelson, a Democrat of Florida and chairman of the space subcommittee; and John Boozman, Republican of Arkansas.        
 The Obama administration has placed higher priority on financing commercial companies for developing space taxis for taking NASA astronauts to orbit.        
  Kenneth Chang contributed reporting from New York.
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=799b6059393a0d6335a6bf75f1dcae8bNASA has ordered the crew of the space shuttle Endeavour to take an unusually close look at a damaged tile in its delicate heat shield on Saturday morning. Using the shuttle’s robotic arm, astronauts will scrutinize a gouge on the shuttle’s underbelly with a high-resolution camera and a laser attached to a boom. “There’s nothing alarming here, and we’re not really concerned,” said LeRoy Cain, chairman of the shuttle mission’s management team. He said the maneuver is being done out of an abundance of caution and will not disrupt the crew or its 16-day mission to the International Space Station. The damage was spotted in photos taken on Wednesday; it is about the size of a deck of cards and is just below the rear landing gear. NASA engineers say they are confident that the damage is not similar to the problem that caused the disintegration of the space shuttle Columbia in 2003.
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=f7a301d0f7e70f2cfad84e680662930fLights on Earth Impede Arizona’s Eyes on Space
  Joshua Lott for The New York Times
 The Fred Lawrence Whipple Observatory at Mount Hopkins, Ariz. 
 
  By MARC LACEY
  Published: May 19, 2011    
     comments 
  Sign In to E-Mail 
  Print 
              Reprints 
    
 
 
 
      MOUNT HOPKINS, Ariz. — There is no Border Patrol in space. But the very earthly cat-and-mouse game between smugglers and America’s border agents is affecting the exploration of space, lighting up the nighttime sky in southern Arizona and making astronomers strain even harder to figure out the mysteries of the universe.        
 
   Related
  Times Topic: Telescopes and Observatories

  
   Enlarge This Image
    
 Joshua Lott for The New York Times
 A sign near the observatory asks drivers to use their low beams.                            
 
   Enlarge This Image
    
 Joshua Lott for The New York Times
 Dan Brocious, a spokesman for the observatory, with its giant telescope.                            
 
 
    Arizona is an astronomy haven with an array of prestigious observatories taking advantage of the state’s dry weather, minimal cloud cover and dark skies. But the state’s astronomers worry about a variety of threats — border enforcement among them — to the pristine conditions that have allowed them to discover new planets, gain important insights into how the universe functions and generate hundreds of millions of dollars annually in economic return.        
 Drug smugglers and illegal immigrants making their way north are sometimes visible to astronomers at the Fred Lawrence Whipple Observatory here who take a break from gazing skyward to look around the rough, wooded terrain. But it is not the outlaws that affect their work as much as the authorities who are after them.        
 A Border Patrol helicopter shining a blinding beam on a group of suspects runs the risk of interfering with valuable machinery trained upward, like the four massive telescopes, known as Veritas or the Very Energetic Radiation Telescope Array System, that measure gamma rays. “It’s happened,” said Dan Brocious, spokesman for the observatory, which is jointly run by the Smithsonian Institution and Harvard University and has operated atop this mountaintop since 1968.        
 The Border Patrol says that it tries to steer its helicopters clear of observatories, but that frequent staff turnover has occasionally resulted in missteps.        
 The checkpoints that the Border Patrol has set up around southern Arizona, complete with high-powered beams to light them up at night, have been another sore point, prompting meetings between area astronomers and agents and a pledge from the Border Patrol to reduce the wattage. The lights are among the brightest points now visible at night in the area, astronomers say.        
 But even car headlights can be a problem for sensitive stargazing, which is why signs along the winding road that leads to the observatory urge drivers to use only their parking lights after dark. The nearly 50 years since the Whipple Observatory was built here in the Coronado National Forest have brought retirement communities, shopping malls and assorted other developments to the area, all of which have boosted the light levels detected by astronomers scrutinizing the sky.        
 Wildfires are another concern in the remote areas where the observatories are located. In 2005, a fire that was caused by a lightning strike came within less than a mile of the Whipple Observatory, which had to be evacuated until firefighters, aided by a sudden rainstorm, were able to control it.        
 Earlier this year, a fire west of Nogales prompted a brief closing of the MMT Observatory, which is also atop Mount Hopkins. The observatory’s large telescope, 21 feet in diameter, is the 14th largest in the world and is sought after by researchers looking into deep space. Besides less-than-optimal viewing conditions caused by the fire, operators were worried about the buildup of ash on the mirror.        
 Well after the sun has set, from 8,500 feet up on Mount Hopkins, the second-highest peak in the Santa Rita Range, one can observe both the majestic nature of the universe and the threats to the stargazing that has long gone on here. Competing with moonlight are street lights, traffic lights, security lights and innumerable other forms of illumination. To the north is the Tucson skyline, a vast expanse of soft white and yellow light, which has been managed by municipal dark-sky restrictions and has not grown in intensity anywhere near as fast as the population.        
 Astronomers are a powerful lobby here when it comes to keeping the skies dark at night, and nearby Tucson is the headquarters for the International Dark-Sky Association, which attempts to press for light restrictions around the world. “Light pollution is an issue all over the world,” said Paul J. Groot, an astronomer from the Netherlands who was conducting research on the source of X-rays from other galaxies at the MMT Observatory this week. “It limits our deep observation of the night sky.”        
 An open-pit copper mine that is proposed for an area southeast of Tucson and would operate around the clock has alarmed dark-sky advocates, even though the Rosemont Copper Company has said it plans to abide by Pima County’s restrictions on light pollution.        
 “When these observatories were selected, there was hardly anyone living here,” Mr. Brocious said atop the mountain as darkness and light seemed to compete in all directions. “Tucson was a sleepy little cow town back then. There’s nothing sleepy about it now.”        
  This article has been revised to reflect the following correction:
Correction: May 23, 2011

An article on Friday about the growing difficulty caused by light pollution at astronomical observatories in southern Arizona misidentified the part of the large telescope at the MMT Observatory that was endangered by an accumulation of ash from a recent wildfire. It was a mirror, not a lens.
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=2e5b1ffaaa7bd6cc799917737ddcda93Is the galaxy full of orphans?        
 
    Enlarge This Image
    
 NASA/JPL-Caltech/R. Hurt
 An artist's rendering of an isolated planet.                            
 
  

  Multimedia
 
       
 Under a Cosmic Magnifying Glass
 
   Under a Cosmic Magnifying Glass
  
 
 
   Close Video
    See More Videos » 
 
 
 
 
  
    Astronomers said Wednesday that space was littered with hundreds of billions of planets that had been ejected from the planetary systems that gave them birth and either were going their own lonely ways or were only distantly bound to stars at least 10 times as far away as the Sun is from the Earth.        
 There are two Jupiter-mass planets floating around for each of the 200 billion stars in the Milky Way galaxy, according to measurements and calculations by an international group of astronomers led by Takahiro Sumi, of Osaka University in Japan, and reported in the journal Nature.        
 “It’s a bit of a surprise,” said David Bennett, a Notre Dame astronomer who was part of the team. Before this research, it was thought that only about 10 or 20 percent of stars harbored Jupiter-mass planets. Now it seems as if the planets outnumber the stars.        
 “The implications of this discovery are profound,” wrote Joachim Wambsganss, of Heidelberg University in Germany, in an accompanying commentary in Nature.        
 Alan Boss of the Carnegie Institution in Washington said, “It means there are a lot more gas giants out there than previous estimates.” This, he added, has important consequences for theories of how such planets form.        
 Planetary astronomers say the results will allow them to tap into a whole new unsuspected realm of exoplanets — as planets outside our own solar system are called — causing scientists to re-evaluate how many there are, where they are and how they are created, even as astronomers immediately begin to ponder whether the new planets in question are in fact floating free or are just far from their stars, at distances comparable to those of Uranus and Neptune in our own solar system.        
 “Either there is a large population of Jupiter-mass planets far from their star, or, yes, there are a lot of lonely planets out there,” said Sara Seager, a planetary theorist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.        
 In the past two decades, astronomers have identified some 500 planets that are circling other stars, and this year scientists using NASA’s Kepler satellite announced 1,235 more candidates. But these were found using methods that favored the detection of planets close to their stars.        
 The new work was done using a method known as gravitational microlensing, which is more sensitive to planets farther out. It relies on the ability of the gravitational field of a massive object — in this case a planet and its star — to bend light and act as a magnifying lens, as predicted by Einstein’s general theory of relativity.        
 Astronomers from two groups — Microlensing Observations in Astrophysics, based in New Zealand and Japan, and the Optical Gravitational Lensing Experiment, based in Poland and Chile — monitor the light from a vast field of background stars, looking for brief blips of increased brightness caused by a planet and its host star passing in the foreground.        
 The group recorded 10 such events consistent with being caused by planet-size objects but did not detect the corresponding blips from these planets’ host stars, suggesting either that they did not belong to any star, having been ejected by gravitational pinball games earlier in their lives, or that they were very distant.        
 Dr. Bennett said the results were consistent with these new planets’ being about the same mass as Jupiter. In that case, he said, the prospects for life on them would be dim.        
 In principle, microlensing could detect planets as small as Earth. Indeed, a microlensing experiment to look for planets was to be part of a new NASA spacecraft known as Wfirst, which was given the highest priority by a prestigious National Academy of Sciences panel last summer. Now, however, it will not fly until the 2020s, if it flies at all, because NASA will not have any money for it until the troubled James Webb Space Telescope, Hubble’s successor, is finally launched, perhaps in 2018.        
 Why call these things planets rather than small failed stars, like the slightly more massive brown dwarfs? Dr. Bennett said there are simply too many of them, even when nature’s propensity to make more and more smaller objects is taken into account. “We suspect they formed like planets,” he said, explaining that they were once part of primordial protoplanetary disks.        
 More and better observations should eventually establish whether they are true orphans or just on a long leash.        
 Dr. Boss pointed out that most planetary systems would not have the gravitational oomph to eject so many massive objects. When push comes to shove, moreover, it is always the smaller object that gets sent out into space. There is no way, for example, that our own solar system could have kicked out any of those putative free-floaters, he said.        
 “More likely,” Dr. Boss wrote in an e-mail, “these are distant gas giants, much like our own Jupiter and Saturn. That makes our solar system’s outer reaches look a little more commonplace.”
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=beceb4b1e29cf6c890639d099a27283eKENNEDY SPACE CENTER, Fla. — With Gabrielle Giffords, the wounded Arizona congresswoman, watching from a wheelchair, the shuttle Endeavour lifted off Monday morning on a mission to pry secrets from the universe.        
 
   

  Multimedia
 
      Slide Show  
  Endeavour’s Final Flight
  
 
 
   Related
    Space Shuttle Endeavour Is Readied, Once Again, for Its Final Launching (May 16, 2011) 
 
  
   Enlarge This Image
    
 Julie Fletcher/Associated Press
 At the space center, thick clouds made shuttle viewing time short.                            More Photos » 
 
   Enlarge This Image
    
 Philip Scott Andrews/The New York Times
 The crew of the Endeavour arriving at the launch site this morning.                            More Photos » 
 
   Enlarge This Image
    
 Morry Gash/Associated Press
 Cloudy conditions obscured most of the launch for spectators.                            More Photos » 
 
 
    At 8:56 a.m. Eastern time, the spacecraft rose slowly on a pillar of fire, picking up speed and eventually disappearing from view as it stabbed through a layer of clouds on its way to orbit. Commanding the six-man crew was Capt. Mark E. Kelly, Ms. Giffords’s husband.        
 The congresswoman, who was shot in the head in an assassination attempt in January, watched in private with relatives of other crew members and said, “Good stuff, good stuff,” as the shuttle rocketed away, according to her chief of staff, Pia Carusone. Captain Kelly’s twin brother, Scott, who is also an astronaut, gave a bouquet of roses to Ms. Giffords, who was wearing her husband’s wedding ring on a chain around her neck.        
 Outside, crowds that law enforcement officials had estimated could reach half a million people watched the liftoff, the next to last in the 30-year shuttle program.        
 “It was a fantastic launch,” said Michael P. Moses, director of the mission’s management team. “A great day for us.”        
 It was the second try at a liftoff for the Endeavour, which was grounded by an electrical short circuit on April 29. NASA officials said that the shuttle’s three main engines performed well during the 8 1/2-minute ascent and that the power system that had been the source of the electrical problem functioned perfectly.        
 About 40 minutes into the flight, the crew fired maneuvering engines to alter the shuttle’s orbit so it could meet up with the International Space Station on Wednesday, more than 200 miles above the Earth.        
 Once docked at the station, the astronauts will begin work on the 16-day mission’s main objective: installing the $2 billion Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer, a giant magnet designed to sift through cosmic particles to find evidence of the elusive so-called dark matter that is thought to pervade the universe.        
 As the launching time approached, low clouds were the only concern, because NASA rules require good visibility should the shuttle have to make an emergency landing back at the space center. The clouds proved no problem, although they did obscure the view of spectators a little more than 20 seconds into the flight.        
 “We had the clouds where we needed them, so we went,” Mr. Moses said. “We apologize that the view wasn’t the best.”        
 About two hours before the liftoff, NASA technicians had to make a quick repair on one of the shuttle’s fragile ceramic tiles, which was found to be damaged when the crew hatch was closed. During the first few minutes of flight, a few small pieces of foam insulation were seen coming off the shuttle’s huge external fuel tank, officials said, but a first analysis suggested that they did not cause any damage to the spacecraft. Damage from falling foam led to the destruction of the shuttle Columbia during re-entry in 2003.        
 On Monday morning, Ms. Giffords arrived at the launch control center — where family members normally view launchings — about 7 a.m., her chief of staff said. As the weather improved, “she got very excited ’cause it looked like it was a go,” Ms. Carusone said at a news conference. By Ms. Giffords’s side were her mother, Gloria, and Captain Kelly’s two daughters from an earlier marriage, Claire and Claudia. After the liftoff, there were celebratory hugs all around.        
 Several hours after the launching, Ms. Giffords left the space center for Houston, where she has been recovering at a rehabilitation hospital. Ms. Carusone said that it had not been decided whether the congresswoman would return for the landing, which is scheduled for June 1 about 2:30 a.m.        
 Asked at the news conference whether Ms. Giffords now understands what happened to her, Ms. Carusone replied, “She’s not aware of everything, but as she processes this, as anyone would, she’s learned more.”        
 Ms. Carusone said that the brevity of Ms. Giffords’s “good stuff” comment reflected both the difficulty she had in regaining complete speech abilities and the situation. “For all of us, there’s not many words to describe watching the shuttle launch in person,” she said.        
 She added that there were no plans for Ms. Giffords to make a public appearance. “We’re far from that,” she said. “It’s not a discussion we’ve had.”        
 This is the 25th and last flight of the Endeavour, which was built after the shuttle Challenger exploded shortly after a launching in 1986. The Endeavour, which first flew in 1992, will eventually be put on display at a science museum in Los Angeles. Only the flight of the shuttle Atlantis, scheduled for July, is left on NASA’s calendar.        
 In addition to Captain Kelly and the shuttle’s pilot, Gregory H. Johnson, the Endeavour’s passenger manifest consists of four mission specialists: Mike Fincke, Andrew J. Feustel, Gregory Errol Chamitoff and Roberto Vittori, a colonel in the Italian Air Force. The astronauts will conduct four spacewalks, performing maintenance tasks at the station and delivering a crate of spare parts.
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=c3b023eeaddc010748bb436d2b35180aKENNEDY SPACE CENTER, Fla. — NASA made final preparations for the launching of the shuttle Endeavour on a mission to the International Space Station, confident that it had fixed an electrical problem that grounded the spacecraft two weeks earlier.        
 
    Enlarge This Image
    
 Philip Scott Andrews/The New York Times
 The crew of the Endeavour arriving at the launch site this morning.                            More Photos » 
 
  

  Multimedia
 
      Slide Show  
  A Shuttle Town’s Glory Days
  
 
 
   Related
    Endeavour Lifts Off on Its Final Flight (May 17, 2011) 
 
  
 
    Officials reported no new major technical glitches but were keeping an eye on the weather, saying there was a chance that low clouds or high winds could postpone the launching — scheduled for 8:56 a.m. Monday — for a day or more. The mission, which is expected to last 16 days, will be the 134th and next to last in the 30-year shuttle program, with only a flight by the Atlantis, scheduled for this summer, remaining.        
 Led by Capt. Mark E. Kelly of the Navy, Endeavour’s six-man crew will deliver spare parts to the station and perform maintenance tasks. But its main objective is to install a $2 billion particle detector, the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer, which is designed to look for evidence of the “dark matter” that is thought to make up much of the universe.        
 Captain Kelly’s wife, Gabrielle Giffords, the Arizona congresswoman who was severely wounded in a shooting in January, arrived at the Kennedy Space Center at midday Sunday. She had flown from a rehabilitation hospital in Texas aboard a National Aeronautics and Space Administration jet and will watch the liftoff in private.        
 “Smooth flight with STS 134 astronaut Greg Johnson’s family,” Ms. Giffords’s representatives wrote in a post on her Facebook page, referring to the Endeavour’s second in command. “Thanks to NASA for great fly by of launch pad.” The post included an aerial photo showing the Endeavour on the pad, with a wingtip of the NASA jet visible in the frame.        
 Around the time Ms. Giffords was arriving, workers at the pad were rotating a large service structure out of the way so the shuttle’s orange external fuel tank could be filled with liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen. The structure cocoons the shuttle, protecting it from the elements and providing access to it during the weeks before a launching.        
 As the gray steel structure moved under a sky peppered with clouds, the Endeavour — the newest shuttle in NASA’s fleet, having been built after the Challenger exploded in 1986 — slowly became visible. News photographers snapped pictures from a few hundred yards away, and an alligator bobbed in a small pond nearby, seemingly oblivious to the hubbub. Later, several crew members arrived at the pad with family members for last-minute photographs.        
 The service structure had been rotated out of the way before, on April 28, but an electrical short-circuit in the system that powers the shuttle’s hydraulic controls derailed the launching the next day. After replacing several electrical components and conducting extensive tests, NASA officials declared on Saturday that the problem had been resolved.        
 “Everything’s in really good shape,” said Michael P. Moses, the chairman of the mission management team that gave the go-ahead to start the countdown.        
 The mission has attracted much attention, in part because of Captain Kelly and Ms. Giffords and because the shuttle program is coming to a close. President Obama and his family had planned to watch the earlier launching; when it was postponed, they came to the space center anyway to take a tour and meet with the shuttle crew and Ms. Giffords. The White House said the president would not be at the launching on Monday.        
 NASA officials said that perhaps a half a million people were expected to watch from areas near the space center. On Sunday, spectators were already showing up in Titusville, jockeying in their recreational vehicles for spots along Route 1, which affords a good view of the launching from about 12 miles away, across the Indian River Lagoon.        
 Diana and Dan Wilson, retirees from Traverse City, Mich., had parked their R.V. in a prime location along the road. They spend the winter months in Frostproof, Fla., living in the R.V. with their Yorkshire terrier, Sophie. Ms. Wilson said that over the years they had tried 9 or 10 times to catch a launching in person, only to have the liftoffs postponed every time. They had to settle for watching on TV.        
 “We’re really hoping it goes this time,” Ms. Wilson said, since they will be in Michigan in July, when the Atlantis is expected to fly. “But we don’t want them to hurry. We want them to be safe.”        
 Ms. Wilson, a former nurse, said that if the launching occurred, “I’ll be the happiest American there is.”        
 She added: “It’s got to be better than on TV. It just has to be.”
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=fda0771e655742a5a4cefea174fcf477TEMPE, Ariz. — Like Einstein, he is as famous for his story as for his science.        
 
  
     
  
 This week: A rare interview with a physics superstar, and up in the trees with a sleeping bird.
 
 
 
  Related
  Times Topic: Stephen W. Hawking

   About the Winners of the 'Dear Aliens' Contest (asu.edu) 
 
  
 RSS Feed
    Get Science News From The New York Times » 
 
 
   Enlarge This Image
    
 Tom Story/Arizona State University
 THIS PHYSICIST'S LIFE Stephen Hawking spoke recently in Tempe, Ariz.                            
 
 
    At the age of 21, the British physicist Stephen Hawking was found to have amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Lou Gehrig’s disease. While A.L.S. is usually fatal within five years, Dr. Hawking lived on and flourished, producing some of the most important cosmological research of his time.        
 In the 1960s, with Sir Roger Penrose, he used mathematics to explicate the properties of black holes. In 1973, he applied Einstein’s general theory of relativity to the principles of quantum mechanics. And he showed that black holes were not completely black but could leak radiation and eventually explode and disappear, a finding that is still reverberating through physics and cosmology.        
 Dr. Hawking, in 1988, tried to explain what he knew about the boundaries of the universe to the lay public in “A Brief History of Time: From Big Bang to Black Holes.” The book sold more than 10 million copies and was on best-seller lists for more than two years.        
 Today, at 69, Dr. Hawking is one of the longest-living survivors of A.L.S., and perhaps the most inspirational. Mostly paralyzed, he can speak only through a computerized voice simulator.        
 On a screen attached to his wheelchair, commonly used words flash past him. With a cheek muscle, he signals an electronic sensor in his eyeglasses to transmit instructions to the computer. In this way he slowly builds sentences; the computer transforms them into the metallic, otherworldly voice familiar to Dr. Hawking’s legion of fans.        
 It’s an exhausting and time-consuming process. Yet this is how he stays connected to the world, directing research at the Center for Theoretical Cosmology at the University of Cambridge, writing prolifically for specialists and generalists alike and lecturing to rapt audiences from France to Fiji.        
 Dr. Hawking came here last month at the invitation of a friend, the cosmologist Lawrence Krauss , for a science festival sponsored by the Origins Project of Arizona State University. His lecture, “My Brief History,” was not all quarks and black holes. At one point, he spoke of the special joys of scientific discovery.        
 “I wouldn’t compare it to sex,” he said in his computerized voice, “but it lasts longer.” The audience roared.        
 The next afternoon, Dr. Hawking sat with me for a rare interview. Well, a kind of interview, actually.        
 Ten questions were sent to his daughter, Lucy Hawking, 40, a week before the meeting. So as not to exhaust her father, who has grown weaker since a near-fatal illness two years ago, Ms. Hawking read them to him over a period of days.        
 During our meeting, the physicist played back his answers. Only one exchange, the last, was spontaneous. Yet despite the limitations, it was Dr. Hawking who wanted to do the interview in person rather than by e-mail.        
 Some background on the second query, the one about extraterrestrials. For the past year, Lucy Hawking was writer in residence at the Origins Project at Arizona State University. As part of her work, she and Paul Davies, a physicist at Arizona State, started a contest, “Dear Aliens,” inviting Phoenix schoolchildren to write essays about what they might say to space beings trying to contact Planet Earth.        
 Q. Dr. Hawking, thank you so much for taking time to talk to Science Times. I’m wondering, what is a typical day like for you? 
 A. I get up early every morning and go to my office where I work with my colleagues and students at Cambridge University. Using e-mail, I can communicate with scientists all over the world.        
 Obviously, because of my disability, I need assistance. But I have always tried to overcome the limitations of my condition and lead as full a life as possible. I have traveled the world, from the Antarctic to zero gravity. (Pause.) Perhaps one day I will go into space.        
 Q. Speaking of space: Earlier this week, your daughter, Lucy, and Paul Davies, the Arizona State University physicist, sent a message into space from an Arizona schoolchild to potential extraterrestrials out there in the universe. Now, you’ve said elsewhere that you think it’s a bad idea for humans to make contact with other forms of life. Given this, did you suggest to Lucy that she not do it? Hypothetically, let’s say as a fantasy, if you were to send such a message into space, how would it read? 
 A. Previously I have said it would be a bad idea to contact aliens because they might be so greatly advanced compared to us, that our civilization might not survive the experience. The “Dear Aliens” competition is based on a different premise.        
 It assumes that an intelligent extraterrestrial life form has already made contact with us and we need to formulate a reply. The competition asks school-age students to think creatively and scientifically in order to find a way to explain human life on this planet to some inquisitive aliens. I have no doubt that if we are ever contacted by such beings, we would want to respond.        
 I also think it is an interesting question to pose to young people as it requires them to think about the human race and our planet as a whole. It asks students to define who we are and what we have done.        
 Q. I don’t mean to ask this disrespectfully, but there are some experts on A.L.S. who insist that you can’t possibly suffer from the condition. They say you’ve done far too well, in their opinion. How do you respond to this kind of speculation? 
 1 
 2 
Next Page »
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=0b16d0f2abd9705f0ab63f11fb261050Fountains of Optimism for Life Way Out There
  By GUY GUGLIOTTA
  Published: May 9, 2011    
      Sign In to E-Mail 
  Print 
   Single Page 
             Reprints 
    
 
 
 
      For those who hunt for life on other worlds, water in its liquid form is perhaps the leading indicator. Life as we know it on Earth is based on water and carbon. And if organisms can prosper here in nasty environments — in geysers, in the depths of the sea, in toxic waste, in water that is too hot, too cold, too acidic or too alkaline — why could they not prosper out there?        
 
    Enlarge This Image
    
 NASA/JPL-Caltech
 A REFRESHING ICY DIP Ontario Lacus is a large lake on Saturn's moon Titan.                            
 
 
   Scientists for years regarded liquid water as a solar system rarity, for there was no place apart from Earth that seemed to have the necessary physical attributes, except perhaps Jupiter’s ice-covered moon, Europa, which probably concealed a subterranean ocean.        
 The past 20 years of space exploration, however, have caused what the astrobiologist David Grinspoon calls a sea change in thinking. It now appears that gravity, geology, radioactivity and antifreeze chemicals like salt and ammonia have given many “hostile” worlds the ability to muster the pressures and temperatures that allow liquid water to exist. And research on Earth has shown that if there is water, there could be life.        
 On Mars and Venus, on Saturn’s moons Enceladus and Titan, and even on two outer-belt asteroids, researchers have shown that the presence of liquid water is possible and even likely. Proof of life, of course, will come only when something — or someone — puts a drop of alien water under a microscope and sees a microbe.        
 “Water and carbon-based life works well,” Dr. Grinspoon said. “That doesn’t mean it’s the only way, but it’s the only way we know, and it gives us something to look for.”        
 Finding water in space, in the form of ice, has never been a problem. Hydrogen is the most common element in the solar system, and oxygen is not far behind. When the solar system formed about 4.5 billion years ago, a spiraling disc of dust and gas spun out from the Sun to produce the planets, their moons, and an enormous cloud of comets, planetoids and other bits of cosmic flotsam. Nature endowed much of this debris with a generous helping of water ice.        
 Liquid water is another matter. The heat of the Sun may melt the ice, but in the vacuum of space there is little or nothing on the surface of most solar system objects to keep the heated molecules together, so they flash instantly away as water vapor. This process is called sublimation.        
 The physics of sublimation are unforgiving. Liquid water needs a delicate balance of temperature and pressure. Ice must be able to melt without boiling off, but the water must stay warm enough that it does not refreeze. On Earth, with a sea level atmospheric pressure of 14.7 pounds per square inch, water is liquid between 32 and 212 degrees Fahrenheit. On the unshadowed parts of our Moon, where the atmospheric pressure is zero and daytime temperatures can exceed 260 degrees Fahrenheit, the surface ice is long gone.        
 Ice survives at very low temperatures, however, and the chunks of debris that linger in the chill reaches of deep space beyond Neptune make up the biggest source of water in the solar system today. These dirty snowballs re-enter the planetary system periodically as comets. When they get close enough to the Sun, the ice begins to sublimate, giving the comets their characteristic tail of dust and water vapor.        
 Many scientists say it is likely that much of the ice in the inner solar system came from comets. On Earth, cometary impacts early in the planet’s history could have provided this raw material, and the Sun and atmospheric pressure would have done the rest. Earth is the only place in the solar system so far discovered where liquid is the default state of surface water. And Earth is where life proliferates.        
 But it is maybe not the only place. Dr. Grinspoon has theorized that Venus, whose spectacular volcanism boiled off all its surface water long ago, nevertheless harbored liquid moisture in the noxious clouds of sulfuric acid that cloak the planet. In 2008 the European Space Agency’s Venus Express orbiter measured water vapor in the clouds. About 30 miles above the surface in the Venusian mist, where temperatures are about 70 degrees Fahrenheit, extremophiles could find a comfort zone.        
 Another improbable venue for liquid water is the outer limits of the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter. There, using infrared telescopes, two teams of astronomers working separately in 2008 and 2009 found water ice on the surface of the asteroid 24 Themis, about 280 million miles from the Sun. Last year, the teams joined forces and found ice on a second asteroid, 65 Cybele, which, with a diameter of 180 miles, was about 1.5 times as large as 24 Themis and 45 million miles farther out.        
 1 
 2 
Next Page »
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=bc3c8aaaf391c64e833aaf6a6ae61b25In a tour de force of technology and just plain stubbornness spanning half a century and costing more than $750 million, a team of experimenters from Stanford University reported on Wednesday that a set of orbiting gyroscopes had detected a slight sag and an even slighter twist in space-time.        
 
    Enlarge This Image
    
 NASA
 An artist’s conception of Gravity Probe B orbiting Earth to measure space-time.                            
 
  

  Multimedia
 
       
 The Gravity Probe B
 
   The Gravity Probe B
  
 
 
   Close Video
    See More Videos » 
 
 
 
 
  
   The finding confirms some of the weirdest of the many strange predictions — like black holes and the expanding universe — of Albert Einstein’s theory of gravity, general relativity.        
 “We have completed this landmark experiment of testing Einstein’s universe,” Francis Everitt, leader of the project, known as Gravity Probe B, said at a news conference at NASA headquarters in Washington. “And Einstein survives.”        
 That was hardly a surprise. Observations of planets, the Moon and particularly the shifting orbits of the Lageos research satellites had convinced astronomers and physicists that Einstein’s predictions were on the mark. Nevertheless, scientists said that the Gravity Probe results would live forever in textbooks as the most direct measurements, and that it was important to keep testing theories that were thought to be correct.        
 Clifford M. Will of Washington University in St. Louis — who was not part of the team but was chairman of a National Aeronautics and Space Administration advisory committee evaluating its work, and who wrote a book titled “Was Einstein Right?” — said that in science, “no such book is ever closed.”        
 Einstein’s theory relates gravity to the sagging of cosmic geometry under the influence of matter and energy, the way a sleeper makes a mattress sag. One consequence is that a massive spinning object like Earth should spin up the empty space around it, the way twirling the straw in a Frappuccino sets the drink and the whole Venti-size cup spinning around with it, an effect called frame dragging. Astronomers think this effect, although minuscule for Earth, could play a role in the black hole dynamos that power quasars.        
 Empty space in the vicinity of Earth is indeed turning, Dr. Everitt reported at the news conference and in a paper prepared for the journal Physical Review Letters, at the leisurely rate of 37 one-thousandths of a second of arc — the equivalent of a human hair seen from 10 miles away — every year. With an uncertainty of 19 percent, that measurement was in agreement with Einstein’s predictions of 39 milliarcseconds.        
 Likewise, the “sag” should alter the space-time geometry around Earth, warping it from the Euclidean ideal and cutting an inch out of the Gravity Probe’s orbit around it, so that the circumference is slightly less than the Euclidean ideal of pi times the orbit’s diameter, a fact confirmed by the Stanford gyroscopes to an accuracy of 0.3 percent.        
 For Dr. Everitt, who joined the Gravity Probe experiment in 1962 as a young postdoctoral fellow and has worked on nothing else since, the announcement on Wednesday capped a career-long journey.        
 The experiment was conceived in 1959, but the technology to make these esoteric measurements did not yet exist, which is why the experiment took so long and cost so much. The gyroscopes, for example, were made of superconducting niobium spheres, the roundest balls ever manufactured, which then had to be flown in a lead bag to isolate them from any other influences in the universe, save the subversive curvature of space-time itself.        
 Shortly before the probe’s launching, Dr. Francis said the project had been canceled at least seven times, “depending on what you mean by canceled.” It was finally sent into orbit in 2004 and operated for some 17 months, but not all went well. When the scientists began analyzing their data, they discovered that patches of electrical charge on the niobium balls had generated extra torque on the gyroscopes, causing them to drift.        
 It would take five more years to understand the spurious signals and retrieve the gravity data by dint of an effort that Dr. Will called “nothing less than heroic.”        
 In the meantime, the NASA grant ran out. Dr. Everitt secured another one from Richard Fairbank, a financier and son of one of the experiment’s founders, William Fairbank, that was matched by NASA and Stanford. When that ran out and NASA turned him down for a new grant, Dr. Everitt obtained a $2.7 million grant from Turki al-Saud, a Stanford graduate and vice president for research institutes at the King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology in Saudi Arabia.
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=40b61712ad503189861db96ed67ed8a4Willard S. Boyle, Father of Digital Eye, Dies at 86
  By DOUGLAS MARTIN
  Published: May 9, 2011    
      Sign In to E-Mail 
  Print 
              Reprints 
    
 
 
 
      Willard S. Boyle, who won the 2009 Nobel Prize in Physics for helping to develop a device that is at the heart of virtually every camcorder, digital camera and telescope in use, died on Saturday in Truro, Nova Scotia. He was 86.        
 
    Enlarge This Image
    
 BELL LABORATORIES
 Willard S. Boyle, left, and George E. Smith in 1974. Their work on the charge-coupled device won them a Nobel Prize in 2009.                            
 
 
   His friend Stuart Semple said the death was “kidney related.”        
 Dr. Boyle’s prolific scientific career included inventing the first laser to be used in medicine and helping to choose sites on the moon for NASA’s manned landings.        
 But nothing eclipsed his invention — in only an hour — of the charge-coupled device, or CCD, with George E. Smith, his colleague at Bell Laboratories.        
 The device, smaller than a dime, has become ubiquitous. It is the eye behind every picture on the Internet, every digital and video camera, every computer scanner, copier machine and high-definition television.        
 Its work extends from supermarket barcode readers to the Hubble Space Telescope, from fax machines to the cameras that roamed Mars and the oceans’ floor.        
 It works by taking advantage of what is called the photoelectric effect, which was explained by Einstein and brought him the Nobel in 1921. The photoelectric effect is the name given to the observation that when light is shined onto a piece of metal, a small current flows through the metal.        
 The CCD devised by Dr. Boyle and Dr. Smith captures light and stores it, then displays it by converting it into electrical charges. “The challenge when designing an image sensor,” the Nobel committee said, “was to gather and read out the signals in a large number of image points, or pixels, in a short time.”        
 The effect, it continued, “transformed photography, as sight could now be captured electronically instead of on film.”        
 Dr. Boyle and Dr. Smith split half of the $1.4 million physics prize awarded by the Nobel committee. The other half went to Charles K. Kao for research that led to the development of fiber optic cables.        
 Willard Sterling Boyle was born on Aug. 19, 1924, in Amherst, Nova Scotia, and raised in the village of Wallace in the same province. He lived in Wallace at his death.        
 When he was 3, his family moved to northern Quebec, where his father, a doctor, set up a practice in a logging community. With the nearest school 30 miles away, his mother home-schooled Willard, and the family got around by dog sled.        
 For high school his parents sent him to Lower Canada College, a private school in Montreal. After graduating, he joined the Royal Canadian Navy and became a Spitfire pilot. He earned bachelor’s, master’s and doctorate degrees from McGill University in Montreal, then stayed on to work as a postdoctoral fellow in the school’s radiation laboratory.        
 After teaching at the Royal Military College in Kingston, Ontario, he joined the research staff of Bell Labs in Murray Hill, N.J., in 1953.        
 Dr. Boyle and a co-worker, Don Nelson, developed the first ruby laser to emit a continuous beam of light in 1962. With another colleague, David Thomas, he was given a patent that helped lead to the development of the semiconductor injection laser, which is found in many electronic appliances. In 1962 he was assigned to a Bell subsidiary that offered technical support to NASA. There he helped select lunar landing sites before returning to Bell labs in 1964.        
 Dr. Boyle credited the vigorous brainstorming sessions at Bell, often over coffee, for inspiring the CCD. He and Dr. Smith came up with the idea at a blackboard and immediately “knew we had something special,” he said in his Nobel lecture. The first model based on their idea worked after only an hour’s effort, Dr. Boyle said.        
 After Dr. Boyle and Dr. Smith won the Nobel, several other Bell scientists came forward to claim credit for the CCD discovery. They said the Nobel winners’ achievement, while legitimate, had nothing to do with imaging. These critics said that the original purpose of the work was to develop a memory circuit, and that that was what Dr. Boyle and Dr. Smith first thought they had accomplished.        
 Eugene Gordon said that he and another Bell researcher, Michael Tompsett, were at least as responsible for determining that the CCD could revolutionize all sorts of imaging. “They wouldn’t know an imaging device if it stared them in the face,” Dr. Gordon told the publication Digital Journal.        
 The first mention of the CCD as an imaging device in The New York Times was in 1978, crediting Dr. Tompsett with patenting a device that would yield video cameras small enough to fit in one’s palm. Its patent number was 4,085,456.        
 The patent number of the device Dr. Boyle and Dr. Smith developed was 3,858,232 and was granted four years earlier. Many contend that this patent paved the way for Dr. Tompsett’s work, the importance of which is not questioned. The Nobel committee does not publicly discuss its decisions.        
 Dr. Boyle defended his work. In an interview with Digital Journal, he said: “I can clearly remember the day that George and I developed the concept for the CCD. It’s pretty firm in my mind. I’ve documentation that disproves most of what they’re saying, and the rest of what they’re saying is not at all logical.”        
 Dr. Smith was more brusque, calling the detractors “liars.”        
 Dr. Boyle’s survivors include his wife of 65 years, the former Betty Joyce; a son; two daughters; 10 grandchildren; and at least one great-grandchild. Another son died last year.        
 After winning the Nobel, Dr. Boyle summarized his great achievement at a news conference: “We are the ones who started this profusion of little cameras all over the world.”        
  This article has been revised to reflect the following correction:
Correction: May 14, 2011

An obituary on Tuesday about Willard S. Boyle erroneously attributed a distinction to him and a colleague, Don Nelson. In 1962 they developed the first ruby laser to emit a continuous beam of light; they did not develop the ruby laser, which was invented by Theodore Maiman in 1960. A correction in this space on Friday misstated Mr. Boyle’s profession in some copies. He was a physicist, not a physician.
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=9a7cbd0539a6f17e75280e48ade28657Enlarge This Image
    
 Charles Dharapak/Associated Press
 President Obama and the first lady, Michelle Obama, met Friday afternoon with crew members of the space shuttle Endeavour.                            More Photos » 
 
  

  Multimedia
 
      Slide Show  
  A Shuttle Town’s Glory Days
  
 
 
   Related
    Titusville Journal: In Shuttle’s Waning Days, One of the Last Reasons to Cheer (April 29, 2011) 
 
  
 
    Less than four hours before the scheduled 3:47 p.m. liftoff, National Aeronautics and Space Administration officials announced that it would be delayed at least until Monday afternoon while technicians tried to fix the problem, which affects equipment that supplies hydraulic power to move the shuttle’s engines and flaps during ascent and re-entry.        
 Officials suggested that the launching could be delayed further. “We will not fly this machine until it is ready,” said Michael D. Leinbach, the shuttle launching director, “and today it was not ready to go.”        
 The delay frustrated huge crowds that had gathered outside the space center to watch the start of the next-to-last mission in the 30-year shuttle program.        
 Mr. Obama, who had been scheduled to watch the launching with his wife, Michelle, and daughters, was touring tornado damage in Alabama when the postponement was announced. He decided to visit the space center anyway, arriving about two hours later.        
 At the launching control center, the president and his wife met for about 10 minutes with Gabrielle Giffords, the wounded Arizona Democratic congresswoman and wife of the mission commander, Capt. Mark E. Kelly.        
 Just before going in to see Ms. Giffords, Mr. Obama greeted Captain Kelly in a corridor. The men shook hands and embraced.        
 The Obamas also met with the five other members of the shuttle crew. With their daughters, they toured the building where the Atlantis spacecraft is being prepared for the 135th and final shuttle mission, in late June. They walked under the shuttle, getting a close look at its thermal tiles.        
 The astronauts are under quarantine rules before a launching and ordinarily their contact with others, even family members, is restricted, but NASA officials said flight doctors had cleared the Obamas to meet with the crew.        
 Ms. Giffords, who suffered a severe head wound in a shooting in January, had arrived on Wednesday to watch the launching. There was no immediate word as to whether she would stay in Florida or return to the Houston rehabilitation hospital where she has been recovering for the past two months.        
 The astronauts had undergone final medical checks and donned orange flight suits and were on their way to the launching pad in a van when the postponement was announced. The van made a U-turn and parked briefly at the control center before returning to the astronauts’ quarters.        
 Whenever it begins, the mission, to the International Space Station, is scheduled to last two weeks. The Endeavour crew will install a $2 billion particle-physics experiment, the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer, at the space station, where it will search for evidence of the elusive “dark matter” that is thought to be ubiquitous in the universe. The shuttle will also deliver spare parts, and the crew will perform maintenance tasks outside the station in four spacewalks.        
 Until Friday, preparations for the mission had been relatively smooth, with weather the major concern. But postponements due to equipment problems are not uncommon, and NASA officials had previously said they would not forgo safety procedures just because the president was going to be there.        
 Mr. Leinbach said the problem that forced the postponement was most likely an electrical short in an area of the shuttle that would take time to reach. Shortly after the decision was announced, technicians drained the spacecraft’s huge external fuel tank, which had been filled with liquid hydrogen and oxygen fuel early Friday. The fuels must be removed before it is safe to work on the spacecraft.        
 Mr. Leinbach and other officials said that depending on the extent of the problem, a Monday launching might be possible.        
 NASA has a launching window each afternoon through Wednesday; after that the Endeavour might have to wait until May 9 or 10 to try again.        
  Helene Cooper contributed reporting.
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=89bad7c8626fbacdf323ddb4d4d05168Published: April 28, 2011    
      Sign In to E-Mail 
  Print 
              Reprints 
    
 
 
 
      TITUSVILLE, Fla. — As it has many times before, sometime Friday afternoon the stretch of Route 1 in front of Chris Galorneau’s restaurant will turn into a parking lot.        
 
   

  Multimedia
 
      Slide Show  
  A Shuttle Town’s Boom and Bust
  
 
 
   Related
    In Endeavour’s Final Act, the Supporting Cast Draws Outsize Attention (April 27, 2011) 
 
  
    
  More Photos » 
 
 
   Drivers will abandon their cars, and customers will pour out of the Village Inn, where Mr. Galorneau is the general manager, as they will at businesses up and down Route 1, which serves as a main street for this city of 45,000.        
 Shortly before 4 p.m., all eyes will turn toward the Kennedy Space Center, 12 miles east across the wide expanse of the Indian River Lagoon. There, at Launch Pad 39A, if the weather allows, the shuttle Endeavour will thunder into the sky on a pedestal of flame, carrying six astronauts on a two-week mission to the International Space Station.        
 “The place will clear out,” Mr. Galorneau said Wednesday while waitresses bustled around him, and every diner got a free piece of pie for Pie Rush Wednesday. “Everybody crowds down to the river. And then, as soon it goes up, 10 minutes later I have a packed restaurant and I have a waiting list for hours.”        
 The brief but jaw-dropping spectacle that is a shuttle launching has occurred 133 times before, and Mr. Galorneau has seen his share (except for the time he was stuck inside making pancake batter — “You can’t run a pancake house without pancake batter,” he said — and got to feel the building shake). This launching is expected to be one of the biggest ever, with perhaps three-quarters of a million people jamming Titusville, Cape Canaveral and other nearby towns.        
 Some of the interest in the Endeavour mission is no doubt because of the drama involving its commander, Capt. Mark E. Kelly, whose wife, Representative Gabrielle Giffords of Arizona, was gravely wounded in a shooting in January. She is here to watch the launching. And some of it is no doubt because of an anticipated visit by President Obama.        
 But the main draw is the fact that after this liftoff, and the launching of the Atlantis in two months, there will be no more space shuttle voyages. After three decades, the program has just about reached the end of the line.        
 “You’re not going to see another one — this is going to be it,” said Truman Scarborough, who was Titusville’s mayor in the 1980s and served as a Brevard County commissioner for 20 years.        
 Mr. Scarborough and others said that for the past three or four launchings, the crowds have been getting larger as the program nears its end. Officials were forecasting perhaps a million or more for the Atlantis launch, a crowd that would rival the glory days of the space program, when a mammoth Saturn V rocket propelled the Apollo 11 astronauts toward the moon.        
 At the space center, the shuttle program’s demise is apparent in the physical changes taking place. At Launch Pad 39B, a twin to the pad where the Endeavour sits, workers were dismantling, bit by bit, the giant steel structures that coddled many shuttles before liftoff — including the Challenger, which rocketed off in 1986, never to return.        
 Several miles away, at a huge bay where workers would normally be swarming over the shuttle Discovery to ready it for its next mission, they were instead preparing it to be shipped next year to the Smithsonian Institution.        
 But in Titusville and other towns nearby, the changes are being measured in terms of humans, not hardware. While the shuttle program never really achieved its lofty goal of making spaceflight routine, it did provide a routine for thousands of aerospace workers here.        
 Some of them — mostly employees of contractors, not NASA — have already received pink slips. Many more layoffs and buyouts are to come this summer — in all, about 8,000.        
 “It’s been our livelihood forever,” said the Rev. Tom Porter, pastor of Temple Baptist Church here, who said some laid-off members of his congregation had already left for new jobs elsewhere.        
 Titusville and other communities saw this coming; discussions about the end of the shuttle program began as early as seven years ago. And old-timers have seen this kind of thing before, especially when the Apollo moon program ended in 1973. “In the early ’70s, I used to come over here from St. Petersburg, and it was a ghost town,” Pastor Porter said.        
 Indeed, it was the shuttle program that shook the area out of its post-Apollo doldrums. And while NASA plans eventually to replace the shuttles with commercial manned rockets that would use the space center, no one knows how soon that would happen.        
 Local officials say that the region is much more diverse economically now and that the effect of the space industry, for better or worse, is not as great as it used to be. With its many shuttered businesses — the Miracle City Mall, just down the block from Mr. Galorneau’s restaurant, is a shell of its former self, with only a few stores open — Titusville is not that different from other Florida cities, far from the Space Coast, which overbuilt in the boom years only to fall hard in the economic downturn.        
 Aside from the economic diversity, Mr. Scarborough said, there is something else that is different: life is more complicated. Apollo employed a lot of young engineers who quickly pulled up stakes when the program closed. These days the engineers and other workers are older, and many of their spouses work. Leaving for a new job may not be so easy; it may not even be desired.        
 “Breaking and running, when you’re within 10 or 15 years of retirement, doesn’t seem to be making sense to them,” Mr. Scarborough said. “Which is not what happened after Apollo.”        
 Pastor Porter said that this week his congregation prayed that President Obama, who has continued to nudge the manned spaceflight program away from NASA and toward private companies, “would see the launch and be so moved to keep the program going.” Did he think that would happen? “No,” he said. “Humanly speaking, no way.”        
 Pastor Porter said that some workers have already taken steps to be ready for layoffs. But others have not.        
 “The Bible says consider the ants,” he said. “The ants — you know, they toil, they save up, they prepare. Yeah, in a perfect world that would be great.”
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=0d153504205fa701aa4e174d49e3e46eKENNEDY SPACE CENTER, Fla. — Capt. Mark E. Kelly, the commander of the space shuttle Endeavour, said Tuesday that his wounded wife, Representative Gabrielle Giffords of Arizona, was “more than medically ready” to travel to Florida for the launching.        
 
   Related
    Asked and Answered: Making Do With a Plywood Spaceship (April 27, 2011) 
 
   Crowd to Join as Giffords Views Shuttle Launching (April 26, 2011) 
 
   Obamas to Attend Shuttle Launch (April 20, 2011) 
 
   With ‘Coolest Job Ever’ Ending, Astronauts Seek Next Frontier (April 24, 2011) 
 
  
 
   Captain Kelly said on arriving at the space center from Houston that Ms. Giffords, who has spent the past three months in a Houston rehabilitation hospital recovering from being shot in the head in an assassination attempt, would be coming to Florida “pretty soon.”        
 “It’s something she’s been looking forward to for a long time,” he told reporters gathered here for the launching, scheduled for 3:47 p.m. Friday. “She’s been working really hard so that her doctors would permit her to come.”        
 Captain Kelly and five other astronauts are to lift off on Friday for a 14-day mission to the International Space Station. His wife will watch from a private viewing area, and aside from a possible news photograph or two of the scene, the public will not get a glimpse of her.        
 But her expected appearance — her doctors cleared her for travel early in the week — has made this liftoff, the next-to-last in the shuttle program, one of the most anticipated in years.        
 Her plans have overshadowed the expected appearance of President Obama — which would be the first in-person viewing of a launching by a president since 1998 — and the details of the mission itself, which is to deploy a particle-physics experiment that is one of the most ambitious and expensive scientific instruments ever lofted to orbit.        
 So far, preparations for this mission have been relatively free of the kinds of technical problems that have delayed shuttle flights in the past. On Tuesday, NASA officials were optimistic about the weather for Friday, although they said there was a potential for high winds that could force a postponement for a day or longer.        
 Mr. Obama’s visit to the center will be his first since last April, when in a speech he tried to win over NASA employees for his administration’s blueprint for space exploration. It was a tough sell, since those plans called for scrapping a program to return to the Moon in favor of a longer-term goal of exploring deeper space. He also called for a shift to private companies and away from NASA in the development of new space hardware.        
 Since the speech, the administration and Congress canceled NASA’s manned launcher project, the Ares 1 rocket. Just last week, NASA awarded $269 million to four companies in a second round of financing to develop new spacecraft to take astronauts into orbit.        
 As if to underscore the changing nature of the space program, representatives of some of those companies were on hand at the space center this week to discuss their efforts.        
 But commercial launchings of astronauts are years away. For now, NASA will rely on Russian rockets, this flight of the Endeavour and the final shuttle flight, by the Atlantis, scheduled for late June.        
 The Endeavour mission is the 134th in the program and the 25th for the spacecraft. The shuttle was built to replace the Challenger, which broke apart shortly after liftoff in 1986, killing all seven astronauts aboard. NASA announced this month that the Endeavour would eventually end up in a science museum in Los Angeles.        
 But before it heads into retirement it has a busy fortnight ahead. Among the objects in its cargo bay is a box of spare parts for the International Space Station. Astronauts will conduct four spacewalks to perform maintenance on the station, and the mission may be extended two days to perform more upkeep.        
 But the mission’s most high-profile task is to install a $2 billion particle detector, the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer, on the space station’s external truss, where it will sit until the station is abandoned, perhaps in 2020 or later.        
 The spectrometer, the long-gestating brainchild of Sam Ting, a Nobel physics laureate at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, consists of a giant magnet and detectors that together act as a cosmic sifter, looking for evidence of the elusive “dark matter” that is thought to pervade the universe.        
 The project has been in the works for nearly two decades, and Dr. Ting and his team of collaborators from 16 countries are hoping for a smooth ascent on Friday after years of what could only be described as a bumpy ride. After the loss of the Columbia and its seven astronauts in 2003, the experiment was pulled from the shuttle program, then resurrected five years later after intensive lobbying by Dr. Ting, who has proved to be as much a salesman as a physicist in his long career.        
 In the past year, Dr. Ting himself was responsible for another delay in the project, deciding to replace the instrument’s huge superconducting magnet with a weaker one. The reason, he explained at the time, was that the superconducting magnet required liquid helium to keep it cool, and the helium would run out in a few years. The weaker magnet requires no cooling liquid, and can last as long as the station.
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=e6b109c8e36b80fb8a16bb7a3115b875PHOENIX — Representative Gabrielle Giffords, who has been given the green light by doctors to attend her astronaut-husband’s shuttle launching on Friday afternoon, will be joined at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida by family, friends, aides and health workers — not to mention President Obama and his family — as the space shuttle Endeavour lifts into space.        
  Ms. Giffords’s mother plans to attend, and her father might as well. Two aides who were injured along with Ms. Giffords, Democrat of Arizona, when a gunman opened fire outside a constituent event in Tucson on Jan. 8 will also attend, officials said.        
 “We routinely allow patients outside visits as part of their rehabilitation,” Dr. Gerard Francisco, one of Ms. Giffords’s doctors, said in a statement. “Her attending the launch is a goal that we were working toward, and we have achieved that end. She has made remarkable progress in her rehabilitation, and we saw no reason why she could not travel safely to Florida.”        
 Ms. Giffords, who suffered a bullet wound to the head, will return to her rehabilitation center, at TIRR Memorial Hermann hospital in Houston, “shortly after the launch,” her doctors said in a statement. While at Cape Canaveral, “provisions have been made with NASA regarding Giffords’s care,” the doctors said.        
 It will be the third time that Ms. Giffords has watched Capt. Mark E. Kelly go into space, aides said. The first was when the couple were dating in 2006. The second came in 2008, a year after she went to Congress, and she acknowledged then that it was a nerve-racking experience. This launching has received increased attention because of her injury and because the shuttle program is coming to a close.        
 Ms. Giffords will watch the launching in a restricted area and interact with few people, aides said. Four doctors and several nurses who treated her in Tucson were invited to the launching, as was Ross Zimmerman, whose son Gabriel, an aide to Ms. Giffords, was one of six people killed in the shootings.        
 “I’m told there is nothing that equals the rumble of the earth when this giant manmade force lifts off,” said C. J. Karamargin, the congresswoman’s spokesman, who will also be at the launching. “For the congresswoman to attend is another milestone in her recovery.”        
 Ms. Giffords’s flight to Florida will be her first since she was transferred on Jan. 21 by air ambulance from University Medical Center in Tucson to the specialized facility in Houston. She has remained out of public view since the shooting, and Friday will be no different.        
 The Arizona Republic reported on Sunday that Pia Carusone, the congresswoman’s chief of staff, had heard that paparazzi were being offered as much as $200,000 for a photograph of Ms. Giffords, whose hair is growing back but who still has visible scars.        
 Several photographs have been released by her office and posted on her Facebook page. None of the photographs show her face, and they were released only after approval by her husband. Whether any photographs from the launching will be released is uncertain, her aides said, since Captain Kelly, commander of the shuttle mission, will be otherwise disposed.        
 As of Monday, the part of Ms. Giffords’s skull that was removed to relieve pressure from brain swelling had not yet been restored, hospital officials said.        
 Dr. David Langer, an associate professor of neurosurgery at the Cushing Neuroscience Institutes at the North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System, who is not involved in Ms. Giffords’s care, said someone with brain injuries like hers could travel safely, even with part of the skull missing.        
 “Everybody makes a big deal out of it, but she can travel,” Dr. Langer said. “Is it ideal? Not really. But it’s a huge event.”        
 She could be vulnerable to another brain injury if she were to fall, Dr. Langer said, but if she is unsteady on her feet, she could use a wheelchair. Flying itself is not a risk, he said, not even if the airplane were to lose cabin pressure.        
  Denise Grady contributed reporting from New York, and James C. McKinley Jr. from Houston.
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=de22934860077f36f11e0712df49aec8Interview With Space Station Astronauts
 
   Interview With Space Station Astronauts
  
 
 
   Close Video
    See More Videos » 
 
 
 
 
   Related
    NASA Chooses Space Shuttles’ Retirement Homes (April 13, 2011) 
 
   NASA Awards $269 Million for Private Projects (April 19, 2011) 
 
 Times Topic: National Aeronautics and Space Administration

  
   Enlarge This Image
    
 � 2010 Warner Bros. Courtesy of NASA.
 A still photograph from a film made by astronauts during the Atlantis's visit to the Hubble Space Telescope in May 2009.                            
 
   Enlarge This Image
    
 Scott Audette/Reuters
 Col. Pamela Ann Melroy, with Col. George D. Zamka at the Kennedy Space Center in 2007, left NASA in 2009.                            
 
   Enlarge This Image
    
 Benjamin Rasmussen for The New York Times
 Garrett E. Reisman, left, recently left NASA for SpaceX, a private company. “It was very, very difficult to voluntarily leave,” he said.                            
 
 
   Members of NASA’s astronaut corps have been asking just that, now that the space shuttle program is ending and their odds of flying anywhere good anytime soon are getting smaller. The Endeavour is scheduled to launch this week, and the Atlantis is supposed to fly the last shuttle mission in June — and all the seats are spoken for.        
 “Morale is pretty low,” said Leroy Chiao, a former astronaut who now works for a company that wants to offer space flights for tourists. “This is a time of great uncertainty.”        
 Under President Obama, NASA’s human spaceflight program has been curtailed. The Ares I and Constellation programs, which were meant to succeed the space shuttles and take astronauts to the moon, were canceled, and NASA is instead hiring outside companies to devise alternatives.        
 So when the Obama family heads to the Kennedy Space Center in Florida this week to sit with Gabrielle Giffords, the injured Arizona congresswoman, as she watches her husband, Capt. Mark E. Kelly of the Navy, take off for the International Space Station, it will be one of the last spectacles of its kind for a while. Over the next few years, American astronauts will be competing for a handful of slots on the International Space Station, flying there on Russian Soyuz capsules.        
 “We hope we will overcome this hurdle and continue to explore,” said Peggy A. Whitson, the head of NASA’s astronaut office, whose job includes selecting the astronauts who will fly each space mission. While people’s spirits are a little down, she said, “we’ll have to see — NASA has gone through different phases like this before.”        
 The current situation may not dampen the career aspirations of the elementary school set, but last year alone, 20 astronauts left NASA’s active-duty roster; today, 61 remain, down from a peak of about 150 in 2000. Back then, NASA was gearing up to staff the International Space Station and the shuttles that supplied it.        
 The shift has made a big difference to people like John M. Grunsfeld, the Dr. Fix-It of the Hubble Space Telescope, who has flown five missions for NASA. After his last flight, in May 2009, he asked Dr. Whitson about his chances of returning to space. “She was honest,” Dr. Grunsfeld said. “Slim to none.”        
 If Dr. Whitson had dangled even a small chance at a plum assignment, like commanding the International Space Station, “I probably would have stayed,” said Dr. Grunsfeld, 52. But she did not. So in January 2010, he left NASA to become deputy director of the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, which operates the Hubble.        
 Another astronaut for whom the new realities presented a problem was Capt. Scott D. Altman of the Navy, who has flown four missions for NASA. But at 6-foot-4, he does not fit into a Soyuz capsule.        
 After his last shuttle flight in 2009, Captain Altman, 51, saw the writing on the wall. As he wrestled with the decision over whether to leave NASA, the Obama administration made the decision to scrap Constellation and Ares I. He announced last August that he would depart.        
 Leaving NASA “was the right decision,” Captain Altman said, but “there are some regrets from time to time.” He now works for ASRC Research and Technology Solutions in Maryland, which does engineering work for NASA and other federal agencies.        
 NASA will still be hiring astronauts, though not people of Captain Altman’s vintage. In the next year or two, as more people leave or retire, the agency will recruit a new class of 6 to 12 astronauts, Dr. Whitson said. If NASA decides to reduce tours of duty at the space station from six months to four, that would mean a need for even more astronauts.        
 “We briefed the entire office on what to expect,” said Dr. Whitson, who is herself an astronaut.        
 Meanwhile, opportunities for astronauts outside of NASA are small but growing.        
 Virgin Galactic, part of Richard Branson’s empire, is seeking three space pilots for its SpaceShipTwo rocket plane, which may begin space tourism trips next year. While SpaceShipTwo will take suborbital hops that provide only a few minutes of weightlessness, other companies — like Boeing and the Space Exploration Technologies Corporation, better known as SpaceX — are developing spacecraft that will be able to fly to the International Space Station and elsewhere.        
 Garrett E. Reisman, who joined the astronaut corps in 1998, left NASA last month for SpaceX, which was founded by the Internet entrepreneur Elon Musk. Dr. Reisman had logged more than three months in space and done work on the space station’s robotic arm.        
 “Being an astronaut is the coolest job ever,” said Dr. Reisman, 43. “It was very, very difficult to voluntarily leave.”        
 If Dr. Reisman had stayed at NASA, he would have had a chance to fly again, but he decided to move on. Now he is working on a rocket (the Falcon 9) and a spacecraft (the Dragon) that are meant to take passengers and cargo to the space station.        
 “It’s an engineer’s dream to design a spaceship,” he said. “To me, it seems like we’re on the verge of a golden age of spaceflight — that’s where I wanted to be.”        
 For every astronaut who quits NASA because of age or a lack of opportunity, there are any number of young people aspiring to fill their shoes.        
 The job is still as romantic as the standards are stringent. According to NASA’s Web site, astronaut candidates must be able to swim three lengths of a pool in a flight suit and tennis shoes; an advanced degree in science or math is a plus.        
 The requirements are even stricter for people who want to work in the space station: you must speak Russian, know robotics, be trained for spacewalks and be healthy enough to spend six months in space.        
 This formidable checklist has helped NASA nudge some astronauts aside. But it has not dulled anyone’s memories.        
 “Being in space is like being someplace magic,” said Col. Pamela Ann Melroy of the Air Force, the second female astronaut to command a shuttle mission. She left NASA in 2009, knowing that there would be intense jockeying by astronauts seeking to command one of the few remaining flights.        
 “I didn’t really want to get into situation where I was hanging around hoping that I would get one of them,” she said.        
 Colonel Melroy is still wistful about the lost prospect of flying on the Ares I. “That would have been a hoot,” she said.
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=9c822af32a0b72b84ea2f233e6b80a1bImagine that someone offered to dump 1,100 busted washing machines onto a prime piece of riverfront property in Midtown Manhattan, pitching the idea as a potential tourist draw and educational attraction. New Yorkers are smart. Many — perhaps even most — of them would say: “Are you kidding me? You’re just looking for an easy way to get rid of 150,000 pounds of junk.”        
 
   Related
    With ‘Coolest Job Ever’ Ending, Astronauts Seek Next Frontier (April 24, 2011) 
 
  
   Enlarge This Image
    
 Dane Penland/Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum
 CURRENT HOME The space shuttle Enterprise at a Smithsonian museum in Virginia.                            
 
   Enlarge This Image
    
 Chris Noel
 DEBRIS ART Chris Noel, who makes paintings from detritus, like "Analog Time Machine," above, has some creative ideas for other uses for the discarded shuttle.                            
 
 
   Same response if the offer was for 499,000 first-generation iPhones or 11,000 broken toaster ovens, all of which would also weigh about 150,000 pounds. Yet the other day, when the city got word that another 150,000-pound castoff was headed this way, moderate rejoicing broke out.        
 The Intrepid Sea, Air and Space Museum was awarded custody of the Enterprise, the space shuttle that, until now, had been on display at the Smithsonian’s Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center near Washington. The Smithsonian is going to get one of the newly retired space shuttles (one of the real ones; read on) and so is magnanimously regifting this one. It is to go on display near the great ship, which, come to think of it, is another federal hand-me-down.        
 I’m not for a minute suggesting that the Intrepid, an aircraft carrier with a distinguished record of service in war and in peace, is anything less than a credit to Pier 86. The Enterprise, though, is a bit of a downgrade; it’s a prototype that never actually flew in space, never docked with anything and never harbored Sigourney Weaver and slimy parasitic aliens. From there it’s just a short step to federal junk with no historic value at all — misprinted tax forms, past-date hardtack, obsolete nuclear missiles.        
 Nor am I saying that the thing won’t attract tourists, because, as 18 years’ worth of “Cats” proved, tourists will apparently pay to see just about anything. It’s just the precedent I’m worried about, especially now, when Washington politicians are eager to get rid of any evidence of their wasteful ways.        
 But, you’re saying, 20 other suitors were going after the Enterprise and the three real shuttles (which went to Cape Canaveral, Fla; Los Angeles; and Washington). Could all of them really have been hoodwinked? Are the feds really smart enough to fool that many people into vying for the right to take government discards? Remember, this is NASA we’re talking about; these folks put men on the moon back when most Americans still had black-and-white televisions and thought that electric can openers were the pinnacle of technological achievement. Yeah, they’re smart enough.        
 Not to worry, though. If the federal government is going to make a habit of dumping its castoffs here, we have people who can turn that into a positive. They’re called artists.        
 Lots of artists create the old-fashioned way, by painting, taking a photograph or hiring models to stand naked in the Museum of Modern Art, but there’s a subset of them who make art out of other people’s throwaways.        
 “Trash speaks to me,” Barbara Lubliner of Manhattan, one such artist, told me by way of explaining how to go about turning junk into art. “It says: ‘I’ve got potential. Give me new context. Keep me around until you can vision me in a new life.’ ”        
 Ms. Lubliner is among more than 50 artists contributing to an exhibition opening this weekend at the Williamsburg Art and Historical Center in Brooklyn called “Art From Detritus: Upcycling With Imagination,” in which all the works are made from recycled materials and trash. Figuring that you’ve got to have a sense of humor to make artwork out of trash, I asked a few of these artists to ruminate both on what it takes to turn junk into something someone might want to look at and on what they would do with a used space shuttle if given one.        
 “I’d use it as an art studio,” Ms. Lubliner said. Bernard Klevickas, a sculptor in Long Island City, Queens, whose work is also in the show, was equally utilitarian. “Start a community garden in it,” he said. “The bay doors could be removed and a greenhouse roof installed for the winter season. The shuttle would in essence become a giant planter.”        
 And then there’s Chris Noel, who makes what he calls debris paintings using detritus of various sorts. He’s not part of the Williamsburg show and lives in Maryland. So what’s he doing in this column? He lived for years in Virginia, one of the states where New York has been dumping its trash for some time. And so, as an oblique what-goes-around-comes-around gesture, I’m giving him the last word, to relate what he’d do with a discarded shuttle.        
 “Maybe I would convert it into a land yacht and tour the country,” Mr. Noel said. “Along the way, I would ask all those I came in contact with to make their mark on it in some way, no matter how large or small. I would travel until there was not a speck of unmarked space, and then I would park it and declare it finished. I don’t think an item as significant as this should be entrusted to any one individual. This should be the people’s art. Then you either park it or send it into space for its final voyage, never to return.        
 “O.K., that’s kind of thick with peace, love and harmony,” he added, “but maybe that’s not so bad.”        
  E-mail: metropolitan@nytimes.com
 Ariel Kaminer is on leave.
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=afbde658f1bb1d7f0c74d6dd84073ad0NASA made final preparations on Sunday for the launching of the shuttle Endeavour on a mission to the International Space Station, confident that it had fixed an electrical problem that grounded the spacecraft about two weeks earlier.

 Credit: Scott Audette/Reuters
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=3159eeaf9e40fa8678ef1400eae98effBefore the final launching of the space shuttle Endeavor, in front of the Village Inn, where photographs of past space shuttle crews hang in the dining room, drivers will abandon their cars up and down Route 1, the main street of Titusville, Fla. When the countdown begins, all eyes will turn toward the Kennedy Space Center, where, if the weather allows, the shuttle Endeavour will thunder into the sky, carrying six astronauts on a two-week mission to the International Space Station.

 Credit: Jason Henry for The New York Times
 
 
   Related
   Article:    In Shuttle’s Waning Days, One of the Last Reasons to Cheer
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=1c500a1c0f0bad92aca361ca25321863A portrait of Yuri Gagarin, the first person in space, is part of an exhibition in Moscow celebrating the 50th anniversary of his flight on April 12, 1961. The successful mission was a major space race victory for the Soviet Union and is still considered one of the greatest Russian achievements. It motivated the United States to land an American on the moon by the end of the decade.

 Credit: Alexander Zemlianichenko/Associated Press
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=ef7d43c825148c7fb91c9a6fa7dee989NASA released on Wednesday some of the first photos taken of Mercury's surface by the Messenger spacecraft.

 Credit: NASA
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=83bfa54d570c530367a7310cb23fd34aThe book “Moon: A Brief History,” with its wide variety of illustrations from classical  texts, science fiction and other sources, describes not just the history  of the celestial body but the ways it inspired the human imagination to  take flight, fueled, as Proust put it, by “the ancient unalterable  splendor of a Moon cruelly and mysteriously serene.”

   Begin Slide Show »
********************************
LINK: http://feeds.nytimes.com/click.phdo?i=71c37cac142b3242aeba38d4dff93d21In four years, a small company called Bigelow Aerospace is to launch a private space station that will be leased to governments, companies and perhaps space tourists. If its plans come to pass, its activities in space will dwarf those of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and other governmental space agencies.

   Begin Slide Show »
********************************
